
 
 

 
 Senator HEFFERNAN  (5:39 PM)


—Well, the day has arrived. It has taken a couple of hundred years to figure out that rivers do not stop at the borders. Governments of all persuasions for all time should take a lot of discredit for what has happened till this point in time. At the same time the previous government should get as much credit as the present government for where we are today. You can play all the words you like into that, but what is happening now was instigated by the previous government, and I think there is equal opportunity between governments and political persuasions to at last get the thing right. So I am not going to disagree with the proposition, which they figured out after 100 years on railways when they actually got all the gauges the same, in relation to state borders. If you want to do a bit of blaming, how could you have a resource operating plan for the Culgoa or the Warrego River in all seriousness that stopped at the Queensland border? What better example do you need of stupidity, of political crassness, of states holding the system to ransom? What greater example do you need of a state holding the Commonwealth and the people of Australia to ransom than the Victorian government in the lead-up to the last election with this stupid proposition, as a political convenience, for the pipeline in Victoria? There are endless examples of why this legislation, the  Water Amendment Bill 2008 ,fundamentally makes sense, if we can get some rules around it that make it manageable.

 
 There are potentially some fundamental flaws in this legislation—none greater, Minister, than the ultimate veto power of the states over reallocating the states’ individual consumption from the Murray-Darling Basin. The science for the future says there is going to be a serious decline in run-off in the southern parts of the Murray-Darling Basin. The same science, which of course is always subject to vagaries, says there is the potential of increasing run-off in the northern parts of the basin—particularly, strangely enough, in some of the south-west of Queensland, which would be the Warrego, the Paroo and the Culgoa type areas—if we are to reconfigure the contribution coming from a particular state. And, as we all know, 38 per cent of the run-off in the Murray-Darling Basin comes from a very specific two per cent of the landscape here in the southern parts of the Murray-Darling Basin. We all know that there is a prediction of somewhere—and I see Tom Hatton produced his document yesterday, which we have all known about for a long time, but at least it is written out now—between a 25 and a 50 per cent decline in run-off in a very sensitive part of the catchment. 
 I am unaware what the answer is on the final veto power of the states. We have an amendment that will turn up in the Senate report, which is not there at the present time—I suppose you would say that it was a misprint, it not being in the actual report, but it will turn up as an addendum—to deal with the potential of the veto powers of the states. For too long the states have held people to ransom for their own political crassness, for their own insecurities on understanding things as basic as the contribution of the groundwater to the river system. We put the cap in in 1996 and then all the farmers, being the likeable rogues that we are, got stuck into the groundwater. Before we understood the connection between the groundwater and the river water we had allocated a whole lot of licences, which have put a whole lot of added pressure on the system—all of those sorts of things. Nothing is more stupid—and every government of every persuasion can take the credit for this as well—than that we agreed some years ago to allow overallocations. Tim Fischer, who works for Minister Penny Wong, would know all about this—how are you, Tim? He will be watching. How stupid is it that we allowed the overallocation of water to be converted to a financial instrument? People with sound minds apparently did that. The consequences of that are a further burden on the financial compensation package that will have to be paid for water that was fundamentally free. The river got to a certain point, or it was in flood, and they said, ‘All bets are off; go for your life—it is overallocation.’ It was fundamentally free water which we converted into a compensable financial instrument. 
 In recent days, Tandou Ltd have rescued themselves financially by having taken advantage of that decision some years ago. In a business sense, good luck to them. In its wisdom, the state government, with the assistance, but not necessarily with the full knowledge, of the federal government, agreed to pay $34 million for what they now call supplementary water, which is just an old-fashioned way of saying overallocation. This water is overland flow water that is available when the Darling system is in full flood. It has not been accessed since 2001 by Tandou, even though it had a 49-gigalitre extraction history from 1984 to 1988. In some years they have been able to take 260 gigalitres. It is not metered. It is almost an honour system to own up to the fact that they have it. As I say, good luck to them, if the system is that stupid and the taxpayers are so generous. But we have agreed to do that and in effect it will deliver 35 gigalitres gross and about 26 gigalitres net to the Murray River, at a cost of $34 million. A state government instrumentality brought that into motion—the same state government that, in the same week, announced that, as a cost-saving measure, to save $8 million in the same budget, they were going to make people who were using donated blood pay for that blood. How bloody stupid is that? 
 As I have said, all governments have managed to stuff this up. This could be a step in the right direction. There are some serious problems which will come up by way of amendments to the bill. I do not doubt that the intent of the previous government was absolutely on the money and the intent of this government is on the money. But the trick for its implementation is in the detail. I put the minister on notice that, at the present time, the Victorian government has 94.6 gigalitres of credit for the pipeline, and they are already claiming that they can shove those 94.6 gigalitres down the pipeline. I can table the document. Let me just tell you that all this is sheer bloody lunacy. 

 

 
 The ACTING DEPUTY PRESIDENT 



 (Senator Barnett) —Order! Senator Heffernan, you will withdraw—

 


 

 
 Senator HEFFERNAN 


—Sorry. I withdraw ‘bloody’. It is sheer lunacy.

 


 

 
 The ACTING DEPUTY PRESIDENT 


—Thank you. And I draw your attention to the appropriateness of parliamentary language.

 


 

 
 Senator HEFFERNAN 


—Yes, that is good. But I am sure that the mob out there understand what I am talking about.

 


 

 
 Senator Fierravanti-Wells 


—Do not be unparliamentary.

 


 

 
 Senator HEFFERNAN 


—No; I will not be unparliamentary. If anyone is offended, I apologise. The annual average take-out for Goulburn, Pyramid Hill, Rochester, Shepparton and Turrumberry back in 1994-95 was 2,700 gigalitres. That is what they got. Last year they got just a bit over 500 gigalitres. Next year they are predicting 250 gigalitres. So we have gone from 2,700 gigalitres to perhaps 250 gigalitres. In that same system, with sheer stupidity, we have agreed that Melbourne will take what will be 100-odd gigalitres gross and 75 gigalitres net down a pipeline. There is already 94.6 gigalitres in credit in the system, as they see it, from other savings, so, if they get the pipe built in time, that could mean that next year they could well be taking nearly half the water that is available in the system, unless there is a dramatic change in the weather. How stupid is that? And they talk about high-security water.

 

 Yesterday and the day before and the day before that there was a huge rain in the Gippsland, which is flowing down through Melbourne now and out to sea. How stupid is it that they are just sitting there watching it go by because it is in a different rain shadow from the rain shadow of the Murray-Darling Basin, which is basically in the same rain shadow as the city of Melbourne? So when it is dry in the Murray-Darling Basin it is generally dry in Melbourne, but Gippsland is in a different rain shadow. Why are we not taking water from there instead of from a system where 75 gigalitres net and 100 gigalitres gross could be—it will be, according to scientific predictions—a third of next year’s water availability for all the farming activities in the Goulburn River system. How sensible is that? I do not know what we can do about it and I do not know that this bill addresses it, but some of the ransom notes that are part of this bill are stupid acts like that by the likes of the Victorian government. 
 Managing what is proposed in this bill just worries me, given this history. If the climate science is right and we are getting more rain from one part of the catchment than from another, it worries me that there is still a veto capacity to rearrange the entitlements. In the committee stage we can address questions of how to make sure that we do not get held to ransom with a veto power and how the unanimous agreement of all states cannot be achieved. That is something that I would like to consider. The crassness of the political convenience of a thing like that pipeline beggars belief. It absolutely beggars belief that people would stoop so low as to almost invoke emotional blackmail with a pipeline that just does not make sense against the science of the future. It might have made sense if you were looking at it in 1956 or 1952 or 1974 or 1984, but, against the science of the future rather than the history of the past, it is a stupid decision. Here it is, Minister. There is the graph. They have gone from 2,700 gigalitres of available water to about 600 gigalitres last year, with a prediction of 250 gigalitres next year. Whether you like it or not, the state government is going to stand over you and say that they already have 94.6 gigalitres in credit, but that 94.6 gigalitres could ruin the system if they take it. 
 So I look forward to the details of amendments. Arlene Buchan and the Plug the Pipe mob are, to their great credit, a passionate mob. They appeared before the committee with great passion. The reason they have such passion is that they have great concerns about the impact of crass political decision making. So I look forward to seeing how their amendments get on in the committee stage and whether both sides of this chamber, and the parliament, have the political courage to try and get this right. We have not been through the proposition that may yet come, and obviously the committee considered the social impact of some of the decision making which, like the Toorale thing, is almost unbelievable. It is great for the people who want to get out but, in terms of stranded assets and social impacts, there is no work done. It is just like driving into a fog. God knows what the consequences will be. I am grateful to the Senate for this little contribution. I am just being told to sit down, I think. I was allowed 10 minutes and I had better sit down. Thank you very much. 
