
 
             
              
 

             
            
              
                 
                   
                     
                       Mr TAYLOR 
                      ( Hume — Minister for Energy and Emissions Reduction ) ( 12:12 ):  Firstly, I would like to thank the members who have contributed to the debate on the Water Legislation Amendment (Inspector-General of Water Compliance and Other Measures) Bill 2021. The Murray-Darling Basin is Australia's food bowl. It's home to 2.2 million Australians, internationally significant wetlands and First Nations people. Basin communities have asked for and deserve strong leadership, and they need confidence in the compliance and enforcement institutions that are in operation within the Murray-Darling Basin. This is what the government is delivering with this legislation.  
                 
                 
                   
                     
                       The DEPUTY SPEAKER  
                     
                     ( 
                     Mr Andrews 
                     ):   The original question was that this bill be now read a second time. To this, the honourable member for Griffith has moved as an amendment that all words after 'that' be omitted with a view to substituting other words. The immediate question before the chamber is that the words proposed to be omitted stand part of the question.  
                 
                 
                   
                     A division having been called and the bells  
                     being  
                     rung— 
                   
                 
                 
                   
                     The SPEAKER:   The Manager of Opposition Business, on a point of order? 
                 
                 
                   
                     
                       Mr Burke: 
                       The call was given to the minister for the right of reply when there were still people seeking the call. The debate had not yet concluded. As I understand from the minister, that was inadvertent and wasn't intended. If that's the case, I seek leave for the remaining two speeches from the opposition to be able to be given, at which point we'd then have the division following that. I seek leave for that to be able to occur, because I think it would be contrary to standing orders otherwise. 
                 
                 
                   
                     The SPEAKER:   The debate hasn't been closed on the second reading, so, if there is no objection to leave, I think that will be the quickest course of action. We won't lock the doors. We'll call the division off. That will save everyone time. 
                 
                 
                   Leave granted.  
                 
              
            
            
               
                
 

               
              
              
            
            
               
                
 

               
              
              
            
            
               
                
 

               
              
              
            
            
               
                
 

               
              
              
            
          