
 
             
              
 

             
            
              
                 
                   
                     
                       Senator McMAHON 
                      ( Northern Territory ) ( 18:53 ):  I rise to speak on the Water Legislation Amendment (Inspector-General of Water Compliance and Other Measures) Bill 2021. Today has been a big day for water but an even bigger day for the basin communities. Water is a shared responsibility and water in the Murray-Darling Basin is a finite resource. It's not only a finite resource but a fluctuating resource. We understand that well. We, on this side of the chamber, in the National Party and the Country Liberal Party that I represent, understand water as a resource extremely well. 
                 
                 
                   Water is essential for the health and general wellbeing of the basin's 2.2 million regional and rural people. That is a lot of people who rely on this part of the world for their lives, their livelihoods, their lifestyles and the water that enables them to carry on their activities. But it's not just the people who live there who are reliant on the water; water is essential to support our national economy. The basin contributes $24 billion in agricultural earnings and around $8 billion in tourism in a normal year. That is absolutely huge. It supports so many jobs, so many people. The people who live there and rely on water for their existence also understand the ecology of the basin. They want the basin to remain healthy, because, when it is healthy, their lifestyles, their livelihoods and their production are enhanced and they are able to continue. The people who live there and rely on the water do not want this compromised. 
                 
                 
                   We know that the water is essential for the natural environment in the basin, including for the 16 internationally significant wetlands and the endangered species that inhabit this area. We know this in the National Party. That is why we are fighting for a fair plan that will protect the environment and also protect the livelihoods of the people who live there and the production, the jobs and the economy. To ensure a healthy working basin, water management is, as I've said, a shared responsibility between the Commonwealth and the basin states. We all have a part to play in the management of the water in the basin. That's why we have a Basin Plan, which is an agreement between all basin jurisdictions that we will manage this finite resource in a sustainable way so that it will last well into the future and we can protect this very valuable resource. 
                 
                 
                   In developing this bill, the Australian government has worked closely with basin states to ensure that the bill will have their support before it commences. A really important factor is that we have worked and consulted widely with the states that this will involve. It was in September 2020 that the Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia, the Hon. Keith Pitt, announced the government's intention to create the role of Inspector-General of Water Compliance. This bill will implement the government's commitment to strengthen the compliance and enforcement powers in the Murray-Darling Basin. There is absolutely no point in having a plan and having water allocations and water rights if this is not complied with and if there is no mechanism to actually enforce the details of the plan. This is a fundamental reason that we have police in Australia. There is no point in making laws if you can't enforce them. If you set a speed limit but there is no mechanism for ensuring compliance and enforcement, then there is absolutely no point in setting the speed limit in the first place. You might as well say, 'Go out and do whatever you want to do.' That is why we have committed to strengthen compliance and enforcement powers. This will give communities the assurance they deserve, regarding water management, in exactly the same way that road users are assured of the acts of other— 
                 
                 
                   
                     Senator Thorpe interjecting — 
                 
                 
                   
                     
                       The ACTING DEPUTY PRESIDENT  
                     
                     ( 
                     Senator Kitching 
                     ):   Senator McMahon, just one moment. Senator Thorpe, you can be quiet as well, thank you. Do not interject. 
                 
                 
                   
                     
                       Senator McMAHON: 
                       Thank you. From announcement to parliament, the government has delivered this bill in just eight months. We've listened to what the states, the users and the communities have said and we have come up with a bill in just eight months. This is testimony to constructive engagement with the states and opposition to deliver the accountability and integrity that communities expect from their governments.  
                 
                 
                   This bill responds to recommendations in recent reports and reviews concerning water management in the basin, through both the Productivity Commission's 2018  Murray-Darling Basin Plan: five-year assessment  inquiry report and the 2017  Murray-Darling Basin water compliance review  conducted by the MDBA and an independent panel on this review. Compliance is at the heart of a fair water-sharing system. There is absolutely no point in having a system in place if we don't ensure that those that take part in it comply with it. This bill will establish a strong independent regulator at the basin scale and strengthen the compliance system.  
                 
                 
                   This bill creates a real deterrence around water theft and illegal water-trading offences by establishing criminal and civil offences and strong penalties. Water theft, much like stock theft, is not a small crime. It is a large crime and it deeply affects those who suffer at the hands of this crime. I know, for example, that in the Northern Territory people often refer to stock theft as poddy-dodging, as though it's some kind of sport. But it is not a sport. It is theft—and theft is theft, no matter what you are stealing. If someone steals your car, you suffer. If someone steals your livestock, you suffer. If someone steals your water, you suffer. This is why there need to be penalties in place that will not only deter people from committing this crime but also penalise those who do.  
                 
                 
                   Importantly, this bill recognises that the states are the primary and frontline managers for water compliance, but they are sometimes unable or unwilling to act. The Commonwealth will now have appropriate powers to step in and take enforcement action on water theft. The inspector-general will be able to work across the whole basin to strengthen compliance, increase transparency and improve trust. Trust is a very important thing that people need to have in this plan and in the regulators and the compliance and enforcement process.  
                 
                 
                   A key priority for the inspector-general will be to encourage greater consistency in the guidelines and standards across the basin, so that all water users are held to the same high bar. This role will combine compliance and enforcement powers currently held by the Murray-Darling Basin Authority with the assurance role of the current interim inspector-general. In this role, the inspector-general will listen to the concerns of basin communities to ensure that their voices are heard when it comes to water compliance. The inspector-general will also undertake audits, inquiries and reports in a transparent manner. This gives communities and users confidence in the system.  
                 
                 
                   The inspector-general will also work with other basin states to develop more consistent standards and guidelines. As I said, compliance is at the heart of a fair water-sharing system. All participants need to know that they are being held to the same standards and that they are playing by the same rules. Consistent standards and guidelines will provide the inspector-general with a framework to evaluate the performance of basin jurisdictions, including the Commonwealth, in delivering the Basin Plan.  
                 
                 
                   This bill builds on many years of engagement with Murray-Darling Basin communities and stakeholders. The basin's 2.2 million rural and regional water users will now have the assurance they deserve through stronger compliance, greater accountability and strengthened integrity around basin water management. 
                 
              
            
            
               
                
 

               
              
              
            
            
               
                
 

               
              
              
            
          