
 
             
              
 

             
            
              
                 
                   
                     
                       Senator PATRICK 
                      ( South Australia ) ( 11:53 ):  I rise to speak about the Water Legislation Amendment (Inspector-General of Water Compliance and Other Measures) Bill 2021. There has been a total distraction in the chamber in respect of the purpose of this bill because of the actions of the National Party, because of the weakness of the Prime Minister to control the new National Party—the new Joyce National Party that is so against the river that it's incomprehensible. The government need to recognise exactly what is going on here and they best not support the Nationals' amendments. 
                 
                 
                   The Murray-Darling Basin is a national resource. It serves a number of states—Queensland, New South Wales, the ACT, Victoria and South Australia. It is a national river system; it does not belong to any particular state. For a very long time, in fact since the Federation debates, we've talked about the river system. South Australia is very aware of its importance. We know—I know, being a senator from South Australia—that much of the South Australian population relies on the river. The people of Adelaide use it for drinking water, and people throughout regional South Australia, all the way through to places like Whyalla and Pirie, all rely on the Murray-Darling to supply their water. 
                 
                 
                   The Murray-Darling resource must be managed effectively. It must be managed fairly. There are a number of stakeholders that have an interest in the river, including irrigators. I don't think anyone in this chamber is anti-irrigation. Stakeholders also include the environment, Indigenous people, tourism operators and a whole range of people who have an interest in the river. Everyone is appreciative of the balance and the need to assist all stakeholders, except the Nationals, who say this is only about irrigation. They cut their nose off in spite of their face by working to destroy a river. It's pretty simple: it's a river system that, if you extract too much from it, dries out and you don't have water flowing out of the Murray mouth. That causes all sorts of problems in terms of salt levels. And guess what? It's a pretty simple concept: rivers flow to the sea. This is just craziness. 
                 
                 
                   If we go back to the history of the plan and how we looked at it, it was supposed to be developed—in fact, the law requires it to be developed—on the basis of best available science. When the plan was first proposed and the Murray-Darling Basin Authority did its work, we knew that in order to make the river sustainable we needed to reduce the water take, and we needed to reduce it by somewhere between 3,900 gigalitres and 7,600 gigalitres. They were the scientific numbers. Immediately, when that best available science came out, so too did the political interference, predominantly from the National Party—and indeed, I might add, from Troy Grant, who at the time was a member of the National Party, working against the best available science. Of course, he's going to go on to become the inspector-general. Everyone's alarm bells ought to be ringing now in relation to that. We're seeing what the Nationals are doing today, and we've got a National who is now the acting inspector-general. All of the events of the last 48 hours have put fear into my spine in relation to what is happening. 
                 
                 
                   We were supposed to have between 3,900 and 7,600 gigalitres, but it got whittled down to 2,750 gigalitres, well below what was required for best available science. I know best available science is something that National parties aren't really interested in, but that's what happened: it went down to 2,750. As a result of that, in order for South Australia to protect its right and protect its people, agreement was reached for an additional 450 gigalitres of what is called upwater. If you look at the act, it specifically directs that, through section 86AA, at South Australian environmental sites. It's important. 
                 
                 
                   What we're seeing here is the Nationals, who are not represented in South Australia—and it's understandable why they're not—trying to make a play. Understand what this is all about—it's about politics; it's about what happened over the last 48 hours. Barnaby Joyce— 
                 
                 
                   
                     The DEPUTY PRESIDENT:   Senator Patrick, I remind you to refer to the member from the other place by his proper title. 
                 
                 
                   
                     
                       Senator PATRICK: 
                       Mr Joyce, the now Deputy Prime Minister, committed a coup in this building. He's a person who has caused nothing but difficulty with the Basin Plan. He has actively stated that he doesn't believe we will ever get the 450, even though it was agreed. It was the compromise position between all of the stakeholders and between all of the states. That was what was agreed. We now have a Deputy Prime Minister in a government that purportedly supports the plan who doesn't actually support the plan. We're now seeing that getting played out. It is getting played out by the Nationals here who have self-interest and are manoeuvring themselves for positions in the cabinet. That's what's happening here. It's all about self-interest. It's about self-interest over national interest. That's what's happening here—no question. There is no sensible reason as to why the amendments of the Nationals should get any support at all—none whatsoever. There's no scientific basis. It's about the Nationals supporting not irrigators but big irrigators—alpha irrigators who think any drop of water that flows past their property is wasted water.  
                 
                 
                   I don't even understand why Senator Davey is standing up for this. She knows that in her community they are suffering. I share her concerns. They are suffering because they have to bear all of the load to get water to South Australia, because it's all being taken in the northern basin. And you allowed that to happen. Your minister allowed that to happen. That's the problem. We've got Victorian senators in here trying to break the plan when, in actual fact, what is going wrong is that there is just too much water being taken out of the river system in the northern basin, so none flows down the Darling River. That means the Victorians have to bear all the load. I feel a bit sorry for them, but the solution is not in the amendments that have been proposed by these Victorian Nationals. The remedy is in dealing with the overextraction in the northern basin.  
                 
                 
                   
                     Senator McKenzie interjecting — 
                 
                 
                   
                     
                       Senator PATRICK: 
                       It is absolutely true, Senator McKenzie, but you wouldn't know about science. I will go to Richard Beasley, who wrote a book recently on the river system. Let me read what he said: 'Several people involved in agriculture and in other basin states, and some of the politicians they support, consider any water that flows out of the Murray River to be an exercise in irrigating the Southern Ocean. These people are idiots.' I will let the Australian public make their own minds up about who these idiots are, but it's pretty obvious and it's pretty present. This is just complete stupidity.  
                 
                 
                   We have a plan. It's not the best plan for South Australia, but it's a compromise plan. It's a compromise between all of the different users of the plan. It's not perfect. It requires commitment from everyone. It requires sacrifice. But everyone understands that if the sacrifice occurs we will end up with a sustainable river system, or something that comes close to it—noting that already the numbers have been compromised. The original plan was 2,750. We went to an extra 450, which is owed to South Australia and was agreed by everyone, but the real number ought to have been somewhere between 3,900 gigalitres and 7,600 gigalitres.  
                 
                 
                   
                     Senator McKenzie interjecting — 
                 
                 
                   
                     
                       Senator PATRICK: 
                       I've got Senator McKenzie interjecting, suggesting that there was no science in those numbers. Absolutely there was. That was the finding of the Murray-Darling Basin Authority; it just didn't suit the politics of the Nationals. Every second week in New South Wales the Nationals threaten to leave the basin plan. New South Wales is a petulant child, with various Nationals ministers in control of the water system there. This is what they're like. They have no regard for sustainable agriculture. They're simply looking after big irrigators. That's all they are doing, and it's not acceptable. What has to happen here is the government needs to take charge.  
                 
                 
                   I know that with my fellow South Australians in this place—and I've had a talk to some of my parliamentary colleagues in the other place—if the government supports this there will be extreme difficulty. I can tell you, right now, I will block my phone from every minister in the federal government. I won't be talking to them about any legislation. They can play Russian roulette if they want. This amendment cannot go through. It cannot be supported by the government.  
                 
                 
                   Do you know what? If the government doesn't support it, that tells you something: there's a split in the coalition. When you've got a split, when you've got a party that is not complying with the policy position of the government, the last thing you can do is let their member be the minister. You can't have the Liberal Party saying, 'We support the plan but we're going to give the water portfolio to the Nationals,' when they don't support the plan. The evidence of that is clear. Previous statements that have been made by Barnaby Joyce and the amendment that's been circulated today by the Nationals tell you there's a split, and it can't be allowed to stand.  
                 
                 
                   The Nationals need to be stripped of the water portfolio. They cannot be trusted with the water portfolio, and it's inconsistent with coalition policy. It's quite unbelievable. Scott Morrison, the Prime Minister, now has to show leadership and remove the Nationals from the portfolio. Replace the water minister with someone from— 
                 
                 
                   
                     An honourable senator:   South Australia. 
                 
                 
                   
                     
                       Senator PATRICK: 
                       the Liberal Party. I don't say it has to be a South Australian; it just has to be someone sensible. I can't believe what is going on. This is a disgrace. At the end of the day, I support the idea of an inspector-general, because that will give strength to the program. I note that we used to have a commission that looked after compliance. That was stripped by the Abbott government. Now it's coming back. That was a huge mistake they made. Throughout that process, where we didn't have that compliance, we had rorting and theft on the river. That does no-one any good, including other irrigators. That's the situation we find ourselves in. We've got to get back to the point where we do have an inspector-general.  
                 
                 
                   In terms of amendments, I have circulated one that does seek to remove authority or an overreach where the Murray-Darling Basin Authority is seeking extraordinary powers. I will also advise the chamber that I do not intend to move my second reading amendment. 
                 
              
            
            
               
                
 

               
              
              
            
            
               
                
 

               
              
              
            
            
               
                
 

               
              
              
            
            
               
                
 

               
              
              
            
          