
 
             
              
 

             
            
              
                 
                   
                     
                       Senator DAVEY 
                      ( New South Wales — Nationals Whip in the Senate ) ( 11:21 ):  I rise to speak on the Water Legislation Amendment (Inspector-General of Water Compliance and Other Measures) Bill 2021. It is absolutely clear that Labor and the Greens—and Rex Patrick, but he has always been honest about his position, so I applaud Rex Patrick—who sit there and purport to represent Australia are focused on only one state when it comes to water: the state of South Australia. We are not about stealing water from South Australia. We are not about stealing water from South Australian farmers, who I applaud. The farmers of the Renmark Irrigation Trust, the farmers of the Berri Irrigation Trust, the South Australian Murray Irrigators—I support all of them. That is why we have flagged amendments to legislate the social and economic test applied to the 450 gigalitres by all basin ministers, including the South Australian minister. The South Australian minister agreed to that because the impact on those very South Australian irrigation communities that I've just mentioned would be horrific if all of a sudden they woke up and a big chequebook was being waved under their noses supposedly in the name of their environment. When we are talking about the Basin Plan, apparently it's only the South Australian environment that matters, and not even the South Australian environment across the state. Only one environmental icon site do the Greens care about. Only one does the Labor Party care about. Well, I care about the Narran Lakes. I care about the forests. I care about the Chowilla floodplain. I care about the environmental sites within the Renmark Irrigation Trust. That company did a great deal with the Commonwealth Environmental Water Holder to ensure that you can get water to them and that the water doesn't just flow past their gates and out to sea at the expense of the environment throughout the rest of the basin. 
                 
                 
                   Senator Wong was absolutely right when she said she purchased 1,000 gigalitres of water. I remind people when that happened. She purchased 1,000 gigalitres of water in the middle of the millennium drought, when people were desperate, before we had a Basin Plan and before there was any indication of where the water needed to be used or where the water should come from. She purchased that water at a time when farmers were on their knees looking for help. She came to help them alright, with a massive chequebook. She closed the cotton gin at Bourke, sending hundreds of people into unemployment queues. Yes, the farmers got their money for the water, but nothing was done for the communities where those farmers supported local businesses. 
                 
                 
                   Senator Wong and Senator Hanson-Young say that we're doing this today because of Barnaby Joyce, because of our new leader. 
                 
                 
                   
                     
                       The ACTING DEPUTY PRESIDENT  
                     
                     ( 
                     Senator Polley 
                     ):   I will remind you, Senator, that you should be using the correct titles. 
                 
                 
                   
                     
                       Senator DAVEY: 
                       Sorry: the member for New England. I just want to clarify that that is not why we're doing this today. We are doing this today because we have been listening to our communities. This was flagged at a Senate committee inquiry last year, on 23 September. When the New South Wales water minister, Minister Pavey sat down before the committee—the only state minister to front that committee, despite invitations being sent to all—she said that there were problems with this plan. We are all committed to a Basin Plan. We are all committed to our environment—the whole environment, not just one icon site but the whole environment. But we're not going to achieve the good environmental outcomes that we can achieve if all we're focused on is a number printed in black and white in a schedule of the Basin Plan. That is where we have all got lost over time. 
                 
                 
                   I was involved as a stakeholder, representing irrigation interests—I will put my hand up—back in 2010, when we were negotiating the Basin Plan. I applaud the then minister, Tony Burke, who at the time did listen. He came out to Deniliquin. He fronted 3,000 angry people. Let me put that into perspective. You might sit here and say: 'Three thousand people? That's nothing.' I'm talking about 3,000 in a town with a population of 6,000 or 7,000, in a regional area with a population of 30,000. Ten per cent of the whole regional population came together to front Tony Burke that day, and he stood there and he listened and he took on board what they said and he did make changes. 
                 
                 
                   Then, at the eleventh hour, then Prime Minister Gillard did a dodgy deal with South Australia for 450 gigalitres. I'm convinced that the then minister, Tony Burke, understood the ramifications of that. That is why, in the Basin Plan, there were tests set, and the 450 gigalitres could only be recovered on two provisos. The first was that it was voluntary, that farmers came forward offering their water. The second was that it had no negative social and economic impacts. Well, we have had report after report after report telling us that we've already seen negative social and economic impacts. We've already seen the demise of some of our most vulnerable irrigation communities. In my area I have seen dairy farmers walk off the land in droves because of the impact of buyback. Senator Hanson-Young says it's the most economic and the easiest form of water recovery. What a farce! If your economics is based on what is cheapest, then maybe. But what is the most effective and most efficient, with the least economic damage? It is not buyback. We need to get better and smarter about the way we manage our water. 
                 
                 
                   We have been accused here today of stealing water from the environment and stealing water from South Australia. We're not stealing anything. We are not proposing to take the water that is already allocated to them; we are not proposing to change the Murray-Darling Basin Agreement, which distributes the water between the states; and we are not proposing to take any of the water out of the accounts held by the Commonwealth Environmental Water Holder. What we are proposing is to stop and say: 'They have enough. Now let's look at how they manage it. Let's look at how they get the water to those environmental sites. Let's make sure the whole environment, from top to bottom, is taken care of.'  
                 
                 
                   We have heard, through the Senate Select Committee on the Multi-Jurisdictional Management and Execution of the Murray-Darling Basin Plan—and I note that Senator Hanson-Young, even though she is a member of that committee, has not attended any of the— 
                 
                 
                   
                     The DEPUTY PRESIDENT:   Senator, you are aware that it's not appropriate to reflect on a senator's attendance in here or in committees. 
                 
                 
                   
                     
                       Senator DAVEY: 
                       I withdraw. Through that committee, we have travelled to basin communities in Moree, Goondiwindi, Shepparton and Deniliquin. My colleague on the other side, Senator Deb O'Neill, heard firsthand the pain of these communities. She heard from them that buyback has to stop and that the impact on the water market has affected their businesses. People who haven't even actively participated in the Basin Plan are being negatively impacted by the Basin Plan, just as innocent bystanders. That is poor public policy.  
                 
                 
                   In one of these hearings, it was put to us by a witness: 'Stop with the games and actually legislate what you tell us your policy is.' We have government statements saying, 'We don't want any more buyback; we will focus our water recovery off farm.' All our amendments today are doing is actually putting that into legislation. We know that the Murray-Darling Basin Ministerial Council have agreed to a strong, robust social and economic test for the 450. All we are proposing is to put that test into legislation. We know that both the New South Wales and the Victorian water ministers have asked for flexibility with the sustainable-diversion-limit projects. That's what our amendments propose, so that those state governments have the capacity to make sure the projects they undertake will actually deliver the environmental benefits that they're meant to and that we want them to.  
                 
                 
                   I've been accused of being a climate denier today, but I am not. We know climate change is happening. We know there is an incredible risk of sea level rises, and we know that, while everyone is looking upstream and saying, 'Give me more water,' no-one is looking downstream and asking, 'What's going to happen when sea levels rise above the scope of the barrages?' Nobody is looking at how to manage that risk, and that is a significant risk. We have heard from scientists who have told us that, while, yes, the Lower Lakes are Ramsar listed, Ramsar is not for a fixed point in time; you can apply to adjust it in accordance with what's happening. We've heard from scientists that the ecology of the Lower Lakes in the Coorong is changing due to climate change. But, instead of looking at the Lower Lakes and what can be done to help save them, everyone is looking upstream and accusing farmers—the very people who produce your rice, wheat and potatoes—of being greedy. They are all painted as being greedy corporate irrigators. My husband works on a corporate farm. If it wasn't for some of those corporates, there would be people in rural and regional Australia without jobs. But I have also sat around the dinner table, the kitchen table and the coffee table with farmers at breaking point because they are so scared that the government is going to come out with another big cheque book, that their neighbours are going to sell out from under them, that their costs of doing business will continue to rise exponentially and that they will have no choice but to walk away from the job that they love and from the family homes that they've been in for generations. 
                 
                 
                   Enough is enough. We need to respect our people and our farmers. I don't care whether they're South Australian farmers or New South Wales farmers—from the north or the south. I don't care if they're irrigators or dry land. What I do care about is those farmers deserve the right to farm. They were given a property right and they have seen that being slowly undermined, because we are fixated on a number. I want to get back to the intent of the Basin Plan. 
                 
                 
                   
                     Senator O'Neill interjecting — 
                 
                 
                   
                     The DEPUTY PRESIDENT:   Order! 
                 
                 
                   
                     
                       Senator DAVEY: 
                       I will take the interjection, Senator O'Neill. We have been in government for eight years and the challenge was put to you. You can support us today, and we will get the change that our people want. 
                 
                 
                   
                     Senator McKenzie interjecting — 
                 
                 
                   
                     The DEPUTY PRESIDENT:   Senator Davey, resume your seat. Senator McKenzie, stop the interjections. I note that you are listed as a contributor. You will have your opportunity to contribute. I ask that Senator Davey be heard in silence. Please continue, Senator Davey. 
                 
                 
                   
                     
                       Senator DAVEY: 
                       Senator O'Neill, I take your interjection. We've been in government for eight years, and I welcome you supporting our amendments so we can get the change that you heard yourself from witnesses is needed to support our farmers and our communities that rely on farmers to buy their coffees, to get their hair done, to go to their shops and to support their towns. We can give those communities some certainty in to the future. 
                 
                 
                   I commend the inspector-general part of this bill, which I haven't had a chance to cover off on, because I've been addressing everything else. I commend our amendments. I would welcome the chance to take our amendments to a committee so that people can consider them thoroughly and understand where we're coming from here. This is not about blowing up the Basin Plan. This is about getting it right. 
                 
                 
                   
                     The DEPUTY PRESIDENT:   Senator Whish-Wilson, I have next Senator O'Neill, unless you are rising on a point of order? 
                 
                 
                   
                     
                       Senator Whish-Wilson: 
                       I just want to foreshadow that Senator Hanson-Young will be moving a second reading amendment. 
                 
                 
                   
                     The DEPUTY PRESIDENT:   Thank you. Senator O'Neill. 
                 
              
            
            
               
                
 

               
              
              
            
            
               
                
 

               
              
              
            
            
               
                
 

               
              
              
            
            
               
                
 

               
              
              
            
            
               
                
 

               
              
              
            
            
               
                
 

               
              
              
            
          