
 
             
              
 

             
            
              
                 
                   
                     
                       Ms DANIEL 
                      ( Goldstein ) ( 11:43 ):  by leave—I move amendments (1), (3) and (4), as circulated in my name, together: 
                 
                 
                   (1) Clause 2, page 3 (at the end of the table), add: 
                 
                 
                   
                     
                       
                         
                           15. Schedule 7 
                         
                       
                     
                     
                       
                         
                           The day after this Act receives the Royal Assent. 
                         
                       
                     
                     
                       
                         
                             
                         
                       
                     
                   
                   
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                   
                 
                 
                   (3) Schedule 2, page 11 (after line 7), after item 1, insert: 
                 
                 
                   
                     
                     
                     1A Subsection 6.08(5) 
                   
                 
                 
                   Omit "following the commencement of a water resource plan". 
                 
                 
                   
                     
                     
                     1B Subsection 6.08(6) 
                   
                 
                 
                   Repeal the subsection. 
                 
                 
                   (4) Page 99 (after line 18), at the end of the Bill, add: 
                 
                 
                   
                     
                     
                     Schedule 7 
                     — 
                     Responding to climate change 
                   
                 
                 
                   
                     
                     
                     Water Act 2007 
                   
                 
                 
                   
                     
                     
                     1 Before paragraph 3(a) 
                   
                 
                 
                   Insert: 
                 
                 
                   (aa) to recognise and acknowledge: 
                 
                 
                   (i) the threat of the impacts of climate change to the communities, environment and industries of the Murray-Darling Basin; and 
                 
                 
                   (ii) the need for immediate and urgent action in response; and 
                 
                 
                   
                     
                     
                     2 Subsection 4(1) 
                   
                 
                 
                   Insert: 
                 
                 
                   
                     National Standard  means the standard determined under section 53A. 
                 
                 
                   
                     
                     
                     3 Before paragraph 20(a) 
                   
                 
                 
                   Insert: 
                 
                 
                   (aa) immediate, urgent and adaptive responses to the impacts of climate change; and 
                 
                 
                   
                     
                     
                     4 Before subsection 21(1) 
                   
                 
                 
                   Insert: 
                 
                 
                   
                     
                     
                     Basin Plan to respond to the impacts of climate change 
                   
                 
                 
                   (1A) The Basin Plan (including any environmental watering plan or water quality and salinity management plan included in the Basin Plan) must be prepared so as to provide immediate, urgent and adaptive responses to the impacts of climate change. 
                 
                 
                   
                     
                     
                     5 Subsection 21(4) 
                   
                 
                 
                   After "Subject to subsections", insert "(1A),". 
                 
                 
                   
                     
                     
                     6 After subsection 53(1) 
                   
                 
                 
                   Insert: 
                 
                 
                   (1A) There is to be a National Standard for Managing Water in a Changing Climate. Water resource plans must be consistent with this National Standard. 
                 
                 
                   
                     
                     
                     7 After Subdivision A of Division 2 of Part 2 
                   
                 
                 
                   Insert: 
                 
                 
                   
                     
                     
                     Subdivision AA 
                     — 
                     National Standard for  
                     Managing Water in a Changing Climate 
                   
                 
                 
                   
                     
                     
                     53A National Standard for Managing Water in a Changing Climate 
                   
                 
                 
                   (1) The Minister must, by legislative instrument, determine a National Standard for Managing Water in a Changing Climate that sets out minimum standards for water planning and management rules and practices. 
                 
                 
                   (2) The Minister must ensure that the minimum standards are an immediate, urgent and adaptive response to the impacts of climate change. 
                 
                 
                   
                     
                     
                     53B Basin State water planning and management rules and practices must meet the National Standard 
                   
                 
                 
                   Each Basin State must ensure that its water planning and management rules and practices comply with the National Standard. 
                 
                 
                   
                     
                     
                     8 Before subsection 55(1) 
                   
                 
                 
                   Insert: 
                 
                 
                   (1A) A water resource plan for a water resource plan area must comply with the National Standard. 
                 
                 
                   
                     
                     
                     9 After paragraph 172(1)(a) 
                   
                 
                 
                   Insert: 
                 
                 
                   (aa) to review Basin State water planning and management rules and practices to ensure objectives can be achieved under likely climate scenarios; 
                 
                 
                   I apologise to the minister and the chamber, especially my crossbench colleagues— 
                 
                 
                   
                     
                       The SPEAKER: 
                       Order! Just pause. If members can leave the chamber—there is far too much noise for the member for Goldstein to be heard. She has the call. 
                 
                 
                   
                     
                       Ms DANIEL: 
                       I apologise to the minister and the chamber, especially my crossbench colleagues, for the lateness of these amendments. I appreciate the diligence with which the minister's staff have consulted with me on this important legislation. While I understand the lateness of these amendments means they won't pass, I hope the government will consider integrating these elements as the bill progresses.  
                 
                 
                   My first and fourth amendments would require climate change and its impacts on the Murray-Darling to be taken into account in the administration of the Murray-Darling Basin Plan. The fact is that the Darling is already suffering significant stress, and all of us should worry about the consequences for the Menindee Lakes and the Coorong, for example, should we suffer another drought, which seems highly likely. According to the Murray-Darling Basin Authority, winter rainfall and stream flow in the southern basin have declined by nearly 40 per cent since the mid-1990s, and climate change is only making it more difficult. This is not a climate trigger, although I believe that should be a feature of much other legislation. This would, though, incorporate climate change into the objects of the act. Its absence is a significant oversight, and this would rectify a serious omission. 
                 
                 
                   The third amendment goes to water resource plans, which are an integral part of implementing the Murray-Darling Basin Plan. All jurisdictions, other than New South Wales, have successfully completed their MDB Water Resource Plans and had them accredited. But, as the Wentworth Group points out, despite being more than four years late and having accumulated deficits over the past three years as a result of overextraction in the case of the Barwon-Darling and the Gwydir River systems, these cumulative deficits will be zeroed under provisions in the existing Basin Plan when the New South Wales Water Resource Plan is accredited by the Commonwealth. As all other jurisdictions have met their commitments under the plan to submit and have their Water Resource Plans accredited by the Commonwealth, New South Wales remains the only jurisdiction not to have done so. When they eventually do, they will not be penalised from exceeding the SDLs from 2019 to the accreditation date. The amendment is designed to remedy this oversight. 
                 
              
            
            
               
                
 

               
              
              
            
            
               
                
 

               
              
              
            
          