
 
             
              
 

             
            
              
                 
                   
                     
                       Ms SHARKIE 
                      ( Mayo ) ( 10:21 ):  I move: 
                 
                 
                   (1) Schedule 1, page 10 (after line 29), after item 20, insert: 
                 
                 
                   
                     
                     
                     21 After  
                     Division 4 of Part 2 
                   
                 
                 
                   Insert: 
                 
                 
                   
                     
                     
                     Division 4A 
                     — 
                     Annual progress reports relating to water recovery targets 
                   
                 
                 
                   
                     
                     
                     85AB Secretary to prepare annual reports 
                   
                 
                 
                   (1) The Secretary must prepare an annual report on the activities undertaken for the purpose of making progress towards the following: 
                 
                 
                   (a) increasing the volume of the Basin water resources that is available for environmental use by 450 gigalitres; 
                 
                 
                   
                     
                     (b) the Commonwealth's water recovery target in relation to SDL resource units (as defined in the Basin Plan); 
                 
                 
                   (c) projects that relate to adjustments of long-term average sustainable diversion limits under section 23A; 
                 
                 
                   (d) any other matter specified by the Minister in writing. 
                 
                 
                   (2) The Secretary must prepare a report under subsection (1) in relation to: 
                 
                 
                   (a) the financial year beginning on 1 July 2023; and 
                 
                 
                   (b) each subsequent financial year up to and including the financial year beginning on 1 July 2027. 
                 
                 
                   (3) The Secretary must provide each report under subsection (1) in relation to a financial year to the Minister by 30 October in the following financial year. 
                 
                 
                   (4) The Minister must cause a copy of each report under subsection (1) to be tabled in each House of the Parliament within 15 sitting days of that House after the Minister receives the report. 
                 
                 
                   The reason for this amendment is really around transparency and accountability. This amendment will require the minister to come into the parliament each financial year and explain to the parliament and to the nation exactly where we are with respect to the 450 gigalitres and the Murray-Darling Basin Plan in general. I respect every member's position in this place. I also have the very end of the river—I have the most vulnerable part of the river—and we need to ensure that this river is healthy for future generations. So, to all members who are interested in accountability and who are interested in transparency, I would appreciate if you would support this amendment. Thank you. 
                 
              
            
          