
 
             
              
 

             
            
              
                 
                   
                     
                       Senator McALLISTER 
                      ( New South Wales — Assistant Minister for Climate Change and Energy ) ( 11:10 ):  Senator Roberts, there is much in your last contribution that I think is not factually accurate. I don't really intend to go through all of it except to say this. At the heart of the Murray-Darling Basin Plan is an attempt to address the problem you point to, which is that over many decades many valleys within the basin were overallocated, and that produces a number of problems. It produces pressure on the environment, because there is a limit to how much water we can take out of Australian river systems without there being quite significant consequences for the animals and plants that depend on them; it produces pressure on the quality of water in the system, with real consequences for agricultural activity and also for drinking water for communities in the basin; and it also produces real consequences for those who held entitlements—productive users who held entitlements—because in some states and in some valleys competition between users for access to water in those systems was reducing the certainty that could be offered to productive users in these systems. We can't go on like that. 
                 
                 
                   The origin of the Basin Plan was an attempt to deal with this through an agreement between the basin states and the Commonwealth that would stretch over years and would start to see a better alignment between what could sustainably be withdrawn from the river systems of the basin and allocations. It is why, when people come into the chamber and make glib remarks about near volumetric targets, I disagree with them. Actually, the volume of the water that is taken out of the system does matter for all of the users in the system, and it is why bipartisan support was obtained for an adjustment of the extraction from the system in the original plan. It's also why it's a problem that we came to government and realised that, after 10 years of the Morrison, Abbott and Turnbull governments, the plan was off track, wildly off track. The legislation before us seeks to remedy that problem. 
                 
                 
                   I can't remember if there was actually a question embedded in your last contribution. I'm happy to answer it if there was. I've forgotten, but you might need to remind me. 
                 
              
            
          