
 
             
              
 

             
            
              
                 
                   
                     
                       Senator ROBERTS 
                      ( Queensland ) ( 11:08 ):  Thank you, Minister. I am so pleased to hear that! 
                 
                 
                   
                     
                       Senator Hanson-Young: 
                       You won't get to be the minister for science! 
                 
                 
                   
                     
                       The TEMPORARY CHAIR  
                     
                     ( 
                     Senator Fawcett 
                     ):   Interjections are disorderly. 
                 
                 
                   
                     
                       Senator ROBERTS: 
                       This bill does not confront the fundamental problem: the quantity of licensed and allocated water is greater than the quantity of water available. Increasingly, there are two classes of water holder: government, which is high security or equivalent, plus a small number of high security in South Australia; and all else is low security. The government is now stealing from the people: farmers, communities, Aboriginals. This is why Victoria is not in the plan. Therefore New South Wales and Queensland will bear the brunt of water losses from productive capacity. Minister, there's a lack of water-flow measurement across the basin, in creeks and rivers right across the basin, yet we're allocating water in the basin. The government is stealing water from the basin. When will you face up to, admit, and address this fundamental, core issue? 
                 
                 
                   
                     Honourable senators interjecting — 
                 
                 
                   
                     The TEMPORARY CHAIR:   Order, senators on both sides! The minister has the call. 
                 
              
            
            
               
                
 

               
              
              
            
            
               
                
 

               
              
              
            
            
               
                
 

               
              
              
            
            
               
                
 

               
              
              
            
          