
 
             
              
 

             
            
              
                 
                   
                     
                       Senator McALLISTER 
                      ( New South Wales — Assistant Minister for Climate Change and Energy ) ( 10:35 ):  I have provided a number of answers which set out the way the policy reform is being undertaken. We've received advice that the plan cannot be implemented under the current policy settings, and for that reason we have sought to engage with basin states and with stakeholders to put in place a set of policy arrangements that will allow us to implement the plan. Part of that involves broadening the range of tools available to us for water recovery. Part of it involves extending the time available for the states and territories to complete the projects that they have committed to, to recover water prior to reconciliation. These are important features of this legislation. They are not the only features. 
                 
                 
                   You have obliquely made reference to the arrangements for socioeconomic assessment in relation to the 450 gigalitres. You've also made the assertion that the 450 gigalitres was never part of the plan. This is simply not right. The 450 gigalitres is part of the plan, and the government intends to deliver it. The fact that the National Party spent a decade, under the previous government, trying to undermine that feature of the plan can't change the history, which is that the 450 gigalitres is a commitment and we need to respond to it. 
                 
                 
                   In terms of the policy arrangements, Senator McKenzie, currently the 450 gigalitres can only be recovered through water efficiency projects, and you're right that a socioeconomic test is in place in the existing legislation for those projects. They must have a neutral or positive socioeconomic benefit. That test will remain for water efficiency projects. However, if passed, voluntary water buybacks would be enabled by this legislation. We do expect that they will have some modest socioeconomic impacts at an aggregate basin scale, but there may be uneven and localised negative impacts. For this reason, the proposed legislation does not propose a neutral or positive socioeconomic test to be applied to voluntary buybacks as part of the 450 gigalitres program. 
                 
                 
                   Should negative socioeconomic impacts be identified due to water purchased towards the 450 gigalitre target, the federal government will make transitional assistance funding available. I spoke about that earlier. This assistance would assist communities that have the highest vulnerability to further water purchase and the lowest adaptive capacity. It will support investment that aligns with existing regional development plans and help communities adjust. And I should say that the assistance we are providing is more than any previous government has provided under the Basin Plan. 
                 
                 
                   I go back to my original point: the Basin Plan was well off track when we came to government, a consequence of being deliberately undermined by individuals in the government that you were a part of Senator McKenzie. We are determined to get it back on track. This bill is part of that process. 
                 
              
            
          