
 
             
              
 

             
            
              
                 
                   
                     
                       Senator McALLISTER 
                      ( New South Wales — Assistant Minister for Climate Change and Energy ) ( 11:39 ):  Thanks, Senator Davey. In response to your specific question, the Commonwealth Environmental Water Holder already has access to entitlements of the kind that are described in the amendment; however, the amendment seeks to clarify that they may hold such water and use it for environmental purposes. 
                 
                 
                   I will say though that it is a bit much, really, to be lectured to about the necessity to do one's homework by members of the Liberal Party and National Party, who did everything they could to sabotage this plan over the course of the last government. They didn't recover enough water to get the plan completed by its deadline, and they were told over and over again about that problem. They ignored the advice from experts that said the plan was off track. They had warnings since 2018 from the Productivity Commission's inquiry report and seven subsequent report cards from the Murray-Darling Basin Authority. 
                 
                 
                   Of all the water that has ever been recovered for the basin, only 16 per cent of it was recovered under the coalition government. They shut down programs and introduced barriers to water recovery. Water purchasing programs were shut down. The Off-farm Efficiency Program had almost $1.5 billion available and only about $350 million spent. The on-farm efficiency component had $60 million allocated to it, and none of it was spent. This was not a government that was serious about the plan, and it has created the circumstances where we have come to government knowing the consequences of failure on the Murray-Darling Basin Plan and determined to resolve the problems created over the last nine years. 
                 
                 
                   So, yes, Senator Davey, there is a lot of work to do, a lot of homework, and we're stepping through it in a methodical way, working with stakeholders, putting in place the tools that will be required to meet the plan's objectives. We will also do the analysis necessary to support communities through a period of change. 
                 
              
            
          