
 
             
              
 

             
            
              
                 
                   
                     
                       Senator McKENZIE 
                      ( Victoria — Leader of the Nationals in the Senate ) ( 10:44 ):  I know, Senator McAllister, that you have been sent into the chamber, effectively, to offer a fig leaf of assurance to the two million of us who live in the basin and the mighty industries that we represent, which feed not only our own nation but the globe. That was such a glib response, and it says me that the minister's staff who are sitting here in the adviser's box are doing you a disservice. They should have come to this place with the answers to what are incredibly basic questions, which my home state—and I never thought I would say this, but thanks to the Labor Party in Victoria—has actually done the work on. That's why the Labor Party in Victoria does not support your changes. It's because they've done the social and economic impact, and they understand what it will do. Families will lose employed parents; processors already on thin margins will be closed; and primary producers will go to the wall—not that it matters to the Labor Party or to Tanya Plibersek. She's got a bigger prize in mind, and it's not caring for rural and regional communities, the dairy industry or the horticulture industry. It's chasing down Anthony Albanese and seeking votes in a future leadership contest. That actually— 
                 
                 
                   
                     
                       Senator McAllister: 
                       This is a point of order about imputations. I've allowed Senator McKenzie to make a range of observations about government ministers without interruption, but this is a point of order. 
                 
                 
                   
                     
                       The TEMPORARY CHAIR  
                     
                     ( 
                     Senator Hughes 
                     ):   Senator McKenzie, would you care to withdraw the comment with regard to motivation? 
                 
                 
                   
                     
                       Senator McKENZIE: 
                       I withdraw, if it assists the chamber. Being focused on where Labor Party voters live and vote rather than where food is produced—and, dare I say, where people that vote for the National Party and care about a productive, sustainable and prosperous agriculture industry are—seems to be the motivation behind the bill before us. There's a little bit of differentiation from Tony Burke, I might add. Tanya Plibersek has gone tougher and harder. I am concerned, Senator McAllister, that you are here doing the dirty work, shall we say, on behalf of a minister who hasn't bothered to understand the social and economic impacts. I can see that the advisers aren't giving you any assistance with the actual data that I know they have, because basin states have it and will have passed it on. If they haven't passed it on, it's because the minister hasn't bothered to ask. That is not impugning her motives; it is actually explaining her very clear motives, because she doesn't care about the social and economic impacts of this bill on our people. 
                 
                 
                   That is why, this week, like we've had in Deniliquin, the Goulburn Valley took to the streets in Shepparton to protest against this government's decision to rip away their very livelihoods. There were convoys up and down Shepparton, but I would argue that basin primary producers need to bring that convoy to Canberra, be a little more French or Dutch, and shut down the federal government. We're a little bit out of sight, out of mind for the Labor Party. If you don't live in Sydney, Melbourne or Brisbane, this government doesn't give a stuff about your future or your family's future, and I think it's abhorrent. There are a lot of very, very emotional people, in particular in my home state at the moment, because we know what it'll mean. And it will hang around your neck. I hope that, every single time you hear about a job loss, the mental health impacts, children or social dislocation, you understand that you did this to facilitate your ideological bent for Sydney votes, Melbourne votes and I dare say Adelaide votes, considering the deal with the Greens. 
                 
                 
                   This is a major rewrite of the plan, and, while Labor, the Greens and, I hear, Senator Pocock now may have shown utter contempt to those who live in the regions, I am not ashamed. As much as the government ministers and senators come in here and try and shame me and my political party for standing up for rural and regional communities, we take that as a badge of honour because we know you actually don't give a stuff. We won't take a backward step in trying to protect our towns, our industries and our regions. This bill goes directly against the bipartisan spirit in which the former Labor government constructed the Basin Plan, when Tony Burke worked with the Murray-Darling Basin Ministerial Council. Instead of telling Victoria to get stuffed, which this Labor federal minister has done to her own state Labor water minister, Minister Burke actually worked with basin states and said that it could only be delivered if it didn't negatively impact people. If federal Labor were serious about creating good water policy, they would amend this bill, they'd remove the 450 gigalitres of upwater, they'd remove the need for buybacks and they'd enable new offset projects and no further water would be taken until the Basin Plan concludes in 2024. 
                 
                 
                   Imposing water targets at any cost with a natural river system is crazy. It ignores the science that we now have and neglects the fact that this is a natural river system. It's not a set of pipes you can just connect to each other. There are natural constraints. I have been at the Barmah Choke and that particular environmental asset is being degraded, instead of enhanced, by the way the recovered water is being managed. We have the science now. Let's use that instead of beating basin communities over the head time and time again with the blunt instrument of gigalitres, of volume.  
                 
                 
                   So-called environmentalists who were really leftie activists have campaigned for water targets that have now been rubbished by the scientists. It's a pity we haven't heard enough from the scientists in this debate. In Senate inquiries we were able to get scientists in front of us and prosecute these ideas. They made it very clear that we know more now than we did 10 years ago when the Basin Plan was arrived at. We know how to use the water in a much more sophisticated way because we're actually measuring in a way that we hadn't before. 
                 
                 
                   Alan Moran put in the  Spectator Australia : 
                 
                 
                   There is no serious soil or water salinisation in Australia other than that which occurs naturally. Moreover, it is ludicrous to suggest that farming is causing soil stress when both farm productivity and farm output has increased steadily for two centuries.  
                 
                 
                   …   …   … 
                 
                 
                   The bottom line is that, in pursuit of vastly overstated environmental gains, at least 16 per cent of the Basin's water that was previously used for irrigation is no longer available and a further 6 per cent is now being sought. Frontier Economics— 
                 
                 
                   and I help you out again, Assistant Minister— 
                 
                 
                   estimated the latter would mean $513 million a year lost in gross agricultural production. By severely reducing the productivity of the land, the existing plan will therefore wipe out some $2 billion a year in the form of losses in agricultural output incurred by irrigators and their employees, contractors and customers.  
                 
                 
                   For those in capital cities who want to scoff and laugh at big irrigators that is just a faux political argument about mums and dads, kids at primary schools, football clubs and netball clubs that are going to go to the wall because you are chasing a volumetric outcome that won't even deliver you necessarily the environmental outcomes you seek. So they rightfully, through us, come here and expect some answers. Have you done your homework? Do you know how many job losses there are going to be? Do you know what the economic impact will be? I have sat here and listened today, and you haven't.  
                 
                 
                   Minister Plibersek has been derelict in her duty. I never thought I would say, 'Well done, Tony Burke,' but I do because at least he worked with basin communities. This minister—I will say it again—has been more interested in chasing down Anthony Albanese and Labor Party leadership votes in the future than she has been in standing up for the communities she represents and using the best science so that we have a healthy river, healthy environmental assets and healthy, sustainable communities. 
                 
                 
                   You've done a dirty deal. The Victorian Farmers Federation calls you out. The National Farmers Federation calls you out. Local governments up and down the basin call you out. The National Party and the Liberal Party call you out. We will be watching the devastating impacts of your ideological pursuit. I hope you wear every single one of them, because it is unconscionable what you are doing to basin communities today. 
                 
              
            
            
               
                
 

               
              
              
            
            
               
                
 

               
              
              
            
            
               
                
 

               
              
              
            
          