
 
             
              
 

             
            
              
                 
                   
                     
                       Senator DAVEY 
                      ( New South Wales —Deputy Leader of the Nationals and Deputy Leader of the Nationals in the Senate) ( 11:42 ):  I question your figures when it comes to, particularly, the On-Farm Irrigation Efficiency Program, because I know from personal experience that we actually conducted several rounds of that program from when we resumed government in 2017 through to, I think, 2015 or 2016; that program was ongoing. So money was spent from the program. There was a lot of work done while we were in government to look at how we could make water recoveries and water savings through alternative measures from your buybacks. 
                 
                 
                   I think the last round of buybacks was held in our early term of government, when we were in government. But we saw the damage, and we looked at what the Labor government had written into the Basin Plan, particularly when it came to the 450 gigalitres, which has become this government's whole and singular focus, instead of actually focusing on other areas of the Basin Plan. We looked at those original words and we looked at what then prime minister Julia Gillard had actually said about the need to reduce social and economic harm. We listened to what then minister Tony Burke said at the Press Club and in the chamber when he moved his second reading speech. We also looked at the science, which shows that, without addressing constraints, recovery of the additional 450 gigalitres has minimal, if any, environmental benefit. So, yes, we were trying. One of my greatest consternations was that we did not get far enough on constraints management. And I will be interested to see how the new government goes. 
                 
                 
                   But when it comes to my question about leases, in particular, you mentioned that the Commonwealth Environmental Water Holder already has leases in existence. Can you clarify for me if those leases form part of the water recovery totals or if those leases are beneficial on the side? 
                 
              
            
          