
 
             
              
 

             
            
              
                 
                   
                     
                       Senator McALLISTER 
                      ( New South Wales — Assistant Minister for Climate Change and Energy ) ( 10:19 ):  Thank you for your question, Senator Hanson-Young. I will say at the outset that the government has been very pleased to work with the crossbench generally in relation to this bill and, indeed, with all senators who have engaged in good faith with the government on these important issues. We were pleased to be able to arrive at an agreement with the Australian Greens about how we might approach this, and we thank the Australian Greens for their constructive approach to the discussions. We know that when we work together in a constructive way across the chamber it is possible to improve legislation here in this place, and we're grateful for the efforts the Greens have made. 
                 
                 
                   We understand there are a range of amendments that will be moved by the Australian Greens that the government intends to support. These, amongst other things, will create a range of new and important features of the act, including the capacity to withdraw unviable SDLAM projects, and also to ensure that any government, any minister, will take all reasonable steps to recover the 450 gigalitres of environmental water by 31 December 2027. I realise that does not summarise all of the things that the Australian Greens intend to do in your amendments, but these are important amendments, and we will be pleased to support them. 
                 
                 
                   You asked about First Nations people and the objects of the act. I understand that this was an area that the Australian Greens sought to raise with the government, and we were pleased to engage with you on that question. We agree that the objects of the act should be amended to acknowledge First Nations people. There is presently no specific object in the Water Act or purpose in the Basin Plan that relates to Indigenous people. This overlooks what First Nations people tell us, which is that there are important values that they receive from their use and their connection to water. 
                 
                 
                   In response to that and your representations, the amendment in relation to the objects will ensure that the use and management of basin water resources takes into account spiritual, cultural, environmental, social and economic matters relevant to Indigenous peoples, including in relation to their knowledge, values, uses, traditions and customs. The amendment seeks to incorporate elements of the Echuca Declaration, which was adopted by the Murray Lower Darling Rivers Indigenous Nations and the Northern Basin Aboriginal Nations in 2007. It also includes terminology from the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples. The amendment will ensure that genuine consideration of matters relevant to Indigenous people takes place and can improve Indigenous peoples' outcomes and benefit overall basin water resource management. It responds to a number of recommendations that also came through the Senate committee process and the Productivity Commission's interim report, which reviews the Murray-Darling Basin Plan. 
                 
              
            
          