
 
             
              
 

             
            
              
                 
                   
                     
                       Senator DAVEY 
                      ( New South Wales —Deputy Leader of the Nationals and Deputy Leader of the Nationals in the Senate) ( 11:33 ):  Consistent with what we have seen from Labor governments past and present, what I'm hearing—and thank you for your comprehensive answer, Minister—is that the hard work, the homework, is now being done after the fact. Instead of doing the work prior to introducing this bill to the parliament, instead of asking ABARES to do the assessment beforehand and review the potential impacts, instead of costing what transitional arrangements might end up costing the Australian taxpayers before introducing this bill, you've introduced the bill and then said: 'Trust us. We're doing the assessments and we'll bring it in later.' This reminds me of what happened when the Basin Plan was being drafted, when the then Labor government went out with a massive chequebook and bought whatever water they could, from wherever they could, irrespective of what that water would achieve. They didn't even have a Basin Plan when they commenced water purchase. 
                 
                 
                   We saw, in a classic example, the purchase of Toorale Station. They paid millions of dollars and had big announcements about 200 gigalitres returning to the Darling River through the purchase of Toorale Station, only to find out after the fact, when ecologists went out to Toorale Station and looked at the infrastructure there, that there was over 100 years of man-made ecology that had built up on that station. They found that just removing those levee banks and hoping that water would flow would actually have a negative environmental impact. There are still a lot of man-made levee banks on Toorale Station, but that purchase saw the closure of gins and the loss of jobs. 
                 
                 
                   During my coalition backbench committee tour of the Murray-Darling Basin, we heard from the Bourke shire mayor that buying Toorale Station was tantamount to taking BHP out of Wollongong; the social and economic impacts were that significant. What we're hearing again today through these questions, Minister, is that you're not doing the homework and the assessments before asking this chamber to vote on something that will have significant impacts right across the basin, from north to south. It was the same everywhere I went, like in Dirranbandi and St George in the north. During the 2008 to 2010 buyback process, they saw a decline of businesses in their main streets—not farmers, not agriculturalists but businesses. I'm talking about hairdressers and car dealerships. They saw a decline of 27 per cent. In my hometown and the area of Wakool, we found that work done the MDBA to try to disaggregate other factors from the impact of water buybacks meant that over 200 jobs were lost. The footy club closed and the netball club closed. 
                 
                 
                   In South Australia, in areas like the Renmark Irrigation Trust and the central irrigation districts, the Swiss cheese effect of water recovery programs at that time had a significant impact, not just on the costs to the remaining irrigators but also on the efficiency of those networks. People everywhere talk about the devastation and destruction caused by water buybacks, and yet you're coming to us again, Minister, saying, 'Let us go back into the market and let us use buybacks as a priority water recovery mechanism,' without having done the hard work of the assessment of what the impact would be—or even what it's going to cost us. I've already heard today that you're not going to tell us what it's going to cost us. 
                 
                 
                   You've said that all options are on the table. But I've looked at your amendments to your own bill and I've asked extensively about the one-off adjustments. You also propose changing the definition of 'additional held environmental water entitlements'. You propose to change it from just being an arbitrary water access entitlement, substituting: 
                 
                 
                   …"water access right, a water delivery right or an irrigation right— 
                 
                 
                   and, in different areas— 
                 
                 
                   or part of such a right,". 
                 
                 
                   My question to you is: is that opening the door to other mechanisms, not just strict transfer of licence from one water holder to the Commonwealth Environmental Water Holder? Does that facilitate—particularly the 'or' part of such a right—the ability to enter into a leasing agreement? 
                 
              
            
          