
 
             
              
 

             
            
              
                 
                   
                     
                       Senator McALLISTER 
                      ( New South Wales — Assistant Minister for Climate Change and Energy ) ( 09:21 ):  Thanks for the question, Senator Davey. There obviously are a huge number of studies in the public domain focusing on the economics of water in the Murray-Darling Basin. There are over 100 such studies. They've been undertaken by multiple people, through academia, government reports and consultants, using different methods. Inevitably, they focus on different factors—industry characteristics, water trade, water use, land use, demographics. Our broad challenge isn't that there is too little information in the public realm about the economics of the basin and about water in the basin. 
                 
                 
                   Our approach has been to try and design an overall architecture in the act that will provide the government a range of options to recover the water that is necessary to implement the plan. We've been advised that, under current policy settings, it won't be possible to implement the plan, and it's on that basis that we've brought forward the reforms that are contained in this bill. The final design of the water recovery program is not yet complete. Indeed, the bill does not commit the government to any particular method of water recovery. It simply removes restrictions that are presently in place and gives the government options to complete the plan. To that extent, we are not yet at the point where economic analysis of a particular set of measures or interventions could be undertaken, because we haven't concluded what kind of interventions we intend to utilise. 
                 
                 
                   You asked about the cost to government. I think the minister has been fairly clear that, to the extent that the government engages in water recovery, we wouldn't intend to publish those figures, because of the potential for them to impact on the market generally and on our ability to obtain best value for taxpayers. 
                 
              
            
          