
 
             
              
 

             
            
              
                 
                   
                     
                       Senator McKENZIE 
                      ( Victoria — Leader of the Nationals in the Senate ) ( 10:08 ):  Minister, my questions go to the level of consultation that this government has done in its efforts to turn the Murray-Darling Basin Plan on its head, to turn its back on the agreement reached by the former Labor government when the plan was set up, and to really betray the rural and regional communities throughout the basin, and, in particular, those communities in the southern connected basin, who have done the heavy lifting with respect to water recovery. 
                 
                 
                   I note that the government has chosen to get rid of the socioeconomic-detriment test that Labor, Liberal and National Party water ministers agreed to. There was a consensus, an understanding and an appreciation by state ministers that further water removal would cause severe economic and social detriment, and so they crafted a very sensible way to assess that detriment. This government has walked away from that agreement. This bill and its consequences will hang around the neck of Tanya Plibersek and Anthony Albanese's government when we see the social and economic devastation that will be wrought as a result of the bill before us. 
                 
                 
                   Minister, research shows that in my home state of Victoria the northern dairy industry will be severely, inevitably and devastatingly impacted by your decision here today. Research shows that 80 per cent of the milk cheque is spent within a 100-kilometre radius, not supporting just that local farming family but supporting a service industry in the nearest town—the sporting clubs, the schools, the hospitals and the supermarkets, all employing people, all ensuring that communities have social amenities, because these types of amenities don't exist if people aren't spending money at their local IGA, haven't got kids to play football and netball or don't have a sherbet on a Friday night at the local pub. These amenities only exist in these rural communities because the milk cheque gets spent within a hundred kay. Dairy employs large numbers; it is not just a mum-and-dad operation. Farms in the Goulburn Valley and throughout northern Victoria can employ upwards of nine people. There are a hundred employed in the dairy business network. That is over $7 million in wages, grain trucks—two grain trucks every 10 days delivering feed for the stock—artificial insemination technicians, dairy technicians, plumbers, electricians, fertiliser agents, spreaders, tractor repairers, accountants et cetera. That is the reality of the economic footprint that this government seeks to shut down. The Albanese government talks a big game on local jobs, but not if you're one of the nine million of us that don't live in a capital city, not if you're in small business, not if you're in primary production, not if you live in Shepparton, Tatura, Kyabram, Cohuna, Mildura or Swan Hill. What analysis has the government done on the direct and indirect economic impact of the decision that is before the chamber? 
                 
              
            
          