
 
             
              
 

             
            
              
                 
                   
                     
                       Senator McALLISTER 
                      ( New South Wales — Assistant Minister for Climate Change and Energy ) ( 10:27 ):  Senator McKenzie, you will doubtless characterise the government's policy settings as you like. I can explain to you the approach we are taking. We came to government with clear advice that, as a direct consequence of the approach taken by the government that you were part of, the plan was way off track. Water had not been recovered against the 450. State projects were behind. Accountabilities were not being observed by the Commonwealth government and by the series of ministers under the Liberal and National parties that were supposed to be looking after the Murray-Darling Basin. 
                 
                 
                   We have worked hard to consult with states and territories and with communities about what steps could be taken to get the plan back on track, and this bill is a consequence of that work. This bill, as I have set out, seeks to create a broader range of tools to allow government to implement the plan. It seeks to remove impediments that are presently in place to implement the plan. You ask: will we take an interest in the wellbeing, the welfare and the livelihoods of rural communities and the people who live in them? Of course we will. I have already indicated to you that the government is yet to finalise the precise mix of tools that we will use for water recovery necessary to meet the Basin Plan. This bill will give us a wider range of options—one of which is voluntary buyback. 
                 
                 
                   We recognise that voluntary water purchases are a sensitive subject, and we also recognise that in some instances they may have localised economic impacts that are challenging for communities. As part of the package that we are bringing forward, the government does intend and does propose community adjustment assistance. This was canvassed with basin states, and, in order to understand what assistance will be necessary, of course the government will undertake analysis. 
                 
                 
                   The government has asked ABARES to provide us advice that work is being undertaken, and it will be considered in the context of finalising our approach to implementing water recovery to meet the objectives of the plan. I will reiterate the point I made earlier, which is the objectives of the plan historically have been bipartisan. People in this place have understood that something needed to change in the Murray-Darling Basin, that we could not go on as we were and that, if we did, there would be real consequences—more fish deaths, a continuing decline in bird breeding, water quality that is not up to scratch, challenges in accessing water entitlements because of pressures on each of the catchments. These things are unsustainable. We are seeking to have an honest conversation with the Australian public and with basin communities about what we can do together to meet them and overcome them. 
                 
              
            
          