
 
             
              
 

             
            
              
                 
                   
                     
                       Senator McALLISTER 
                      ( New South Wales — Assistant Minister for Climate Change and Energy ) ( 11:22 ):  Senator Ruston, I don't think it's helpful to call me names. I'm very happy to answer your questions, and I really was trying to understand the specific question you're asking of me. 
                 
                 
                   I stepped through this earlier for Senator McKenzie, although I'm not sure if you were in the chamber. Currently, the four—pardon me? 
                 
                 
                   
                     
                       Senator Ruston: 
                       My apologies for not being in the chamber. 
                 
                 
                   
                     
                       Senator McALLISTER: 
                       That's no problem, Senator Ruston. Currently the 450 gigalitres can only be recovered through water efficiency projects, and the socioeconomic test remains for those water efficiency projects. They must have a neutral or positive socioeconomic benefit. However, voluntary water buybacks would be on the table for the 450 gigalitres should this legislation pass. Our understanding and our advice is that in the absence of the capacity for voluntary buybacks we can't meet the targets in the plan. That's why we're bringing forward the legislation, as the minister has often said. 
                 
                 
                   Voluntary water purchase is expected to have a modest socioeconomic impact at an aggregate basin scale, but we acknowledge that it will have some uneven and localised negative impacts. For this reason, in the proposed legislation, neutral or positive socioeconomic tests will not apply to buybacks as part of the expanded 450-gigalitre program. Should any negative socioeconomic impacts be identified due to water purchase towards the 450-gigalitre target, the federal government will make transitional assistance funding available. 
                 
                 
                   This is a bit repetitive for the other senators in the chamber, but I'll go through it, Senator Ruston. That assistance program will assist communities that have the highest vulnerability to further water purchase and the lowest adaptive capacity. It will help support investment that aligns with existing regional development plans and help communities adjust to be less dependent in a future with less water. The assistance we are providing is more than any previous government has provided under the Basin Plan and, as I've indicated throughout the debate this morning, it is because we consider we need every tool available to help us complete the job. 
                 
              
            
            
               
                
 

               
              
              
            
            
               
                
 

               
              
              
            
          