
 
             
              
 

             
            
              
                 
                   
                     
                       Senator McALLISTER 
                      ( New South Wales — Assistant Minister for Climate Change and Energy ) ( 09:52 ):  Senator Hanson, thank you for your patience. There are a number of different policy settings that are relevant to your question. I was just asking the officials how I might best answer you. I am advised that there is a register of foreign ownership of water entitlements and you can obtain online a public report about the registrations. The one I have before me is as at 30 June 2022. You can find this at foreigninvestment.gov.au should you wish to look.  
                 
                 
                   The reason I was taking time to consult with officials about this is that in some ways your question goes to the level of transparency more generally around the water market and how it operates. There is a place where you can obtain information about foreign ownership, but, more generally, the government considers that the water market does require reform so that it operates in a more accountable, efficient and fair way, so the bill does a number of things. It introduces a clear and consistent framework for water market conduct and information across the basin. It introduces new water market functions and powers for the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission, the Bureau of Meteorology and the Inspector-General of Water Compliance. It creates a framework for a new mandatory code for water market intermediaries, so people buying and selling, and some data reporting requirements. It creates new insider trading and market misconduct prohibitions. These things are all a consequence of quite a long period of policy reform, including a review by the ACCC, I believe, into the operation of water markets. The government does recognise that these markets require reform to operate effectively. 
                 
              
            
          