
 
             
              
 

             
            
              
                 
                   
                     
                       Senator McALLISTER 
                      ( New South Wales — Assistant Minister for Climate Change and Energy ) ( 11:30 ):  Senator Ruston, you can characterise it in various political ways. But I've stepped through the process that we are going through and the policy problem that we're responding to. 
                 
                 
                   At the heart of the policy problem is the fact that the government that you were part of wilfully undermined and frustrated progress on the Murray-Darling Basin Plan. You know that, and you know the impact that that has on basin communities, including communities in South Australia. The consequences of failing to tackle the challenges in the Murray-Darling Basin are quite predictable, because we've seen them before. We saw them in the millennium drought. We saw communities go without water for irrigation. We saw communities struggling to access drinking water. We saw fish kills. We saw dying red gums. We saw declines in the numbers of waterbirds. We saw declining tourism. 
                 
                 
                   These are all risks that would come about if we'd continued on the pathway established by your government, which was a complete failure to progress the objectives of the plan, deliberately engendered by the behaviour of people in the National Party. Let's be quite clear about the problem we are seeking to tackle. I've been clear here about what the government has done in the months since we came to office. We've received advice about the plan and our capacity to meet its targets within the specified time frames. We've consulted with basin states and with a very broad range of stakeholders about options to get the plan back on track. 
                 
                 
                   We are introducing this bill to do a number of things: to create more time for the states and territories to complete the infrastructure projects that they committed to—to generate water under the SDLAM arrangements—but also to give the Commonwealth more options in terms of water recovery, because the advice to us is that, in the absence of the capacity to utilise voluntary buybacks, we are unlikely to be able to meet the objectives of this plan. That doesn't mean that it is the only tool on the table. There are changes in this bill and amendments before this chamber that would further expand the range of other options available to the Commonwealth. But we are being upfront about the fact that voluntary buybacks will be required. 
                 
                 
                   I've also been clear about the approach we'll take to implementing those where they are necessary. It hasn't been finalised yet, but modelling has been requested so that we understand any localised impacts. A program to support affected communities is also being worked through in consultation with the states and territories and with stakeholders. 
                 
              
            
          