
 
             
              
 

             
            
              
                 
                   
                     
                       Senator McALLISTER 
                      ( New South Wales — Assistant Minister for Climate Change and Energy ) ( 11:14 ):  The responsibility for measuring the extractions from the system lies with the states and territories, and there's been substantial discussion about that between the basin states over recent years. The creation of the inspector-general, in part, responds to an overarching concern to ensure that we do have data, that measurements are being taken properly and accurately reported, because it is in the interests of all of the participants in the system that people can have confidence that the extraction is occurring and the system aligns with the licensing arrangements. In turn, it's important that the licensing arrangements align with what the science tells us is a sustainable extraction from each of the valleys. That is the essence of the plan. It's on that basis that the government comes to the parliament seeking additional tools and additional time to get the plan back on track, because these things are in fact, as you say, important. 
                 
                 
                   Senator Roberts, you've made reference to government amendments and a number of senators have also. What I would like to do now is to move the amendments that the government is proposing. I seek leave to move government amendments (1) to (20) on sheet ZC243 together. 
                 
                 
                   Leave granted. 
                 
                 
                   
                     
                       Senator McALLISTER: 
                       I move: 
                 
                 
                   (1) Schedule 1, page 4 (after line 2), after the heading to Schedule 1, insert: 
                 
                 
                   
                     
                     
                     Part 1A 
                     — 
                     Taking into account matters relevant to Indigenous people 
                   
                 
                 
                   
                     
                     
                     Water Act 2007 
                   
                 
                 
                   
                     
                     
                     1A After paragraph 3(f) 
                   
                 
                 
                   Insert: 
                 
                 
                   (fa) to ensure that the use and management of Basin water resources takes into account spiritual, cultural, environmental, social and economic matters relevant to Indigenous people; and 
                 
                 
                   
                     
                     
                     1B After paragraph 20(d) 
                   
                 
                 
                   Insert: 
                 
                 
                   (da) the use and management of Basin water resources that takes into account spiritual, cultural, environmental, social and economic matters relevant to Indigenous people; and 
                 
                 
                   (2) Schedule 1, item 11A, page 7 (lines 19 to 22), omit subsection 86AJ(3A), substitute: 
                 
                 
                   (3A) In conducting a review under subsection (1), a panel must also consider the effectiveness of the following: 
                 
                 
                   (a) payments made, or expected to be made, under paragraph 86AD(2)(c) in relation to a purchase referred to in paragraph 86AD(2)(b); 
                 
                 
                   (b) payments made, or expected to be made, from other sources in relation to a purchase referred to in paragraph 86AD(2)(b). 
                 
                 
                   (3) Schedule 1, item 18, page 10 (after line 5), after subsection 71(1B), insert: 
                 
                 
                   (1C) If, after the commencement of this subsection, a one-off adjustment is to be made, as required by section 6.08D of the Basin Plan, to the cumulative balance for any surface water SDL resource unit for one or more relevant water accounting periods, a report under subsection (1) must also include the following information: 
                 
                 
                   (a) the information mentioned in paragraphs (1)(b) and (c) in relation to each of the relevant water accounting periods; 
                 
                 
                   (b) any other information necessary to make the one-off adjustment. 
                 
                 
                   (1D) The information required by subsection (1C) must be given to the Authority: 
                 
                 
                   (a) if the register of take for the surface water SDL resource unit has already commenced as at the commencement of this subsection—in the first report given to the Authority under subsection (1) after the commencement of this subsection; or 
                 
                 
                   (b) if the register of take for the surface water SDL resource unit has not already commenced as at the commencement of this subsection—in the first report given to the Authority under subsection (1) after the end of the water accounting period in which the register of take commences. 
                 
                 
                   (1E) Expressions used in subsections (1C) and (1D) have the same meanings as they have in the Basin Plan. 
                 
                 
                   (4) Schedule 2, page 12 (after line 4), before item 1, insert: 
                 
                 
                   
                     
                     
                     1AA Subsection 1.07(1) 
                   
                 
                 
                   Insert: 
                 
                 
                   
                     relevant water accounting period , in Division 1A of Part 4 of Chapter 6, has the meaning given by subsection 6.08E(4). 
                 
                 
                   (5) Schedule 2, item 2, page 13 (after line 15), after section 6.08C, insert: 
                 
                 
                   
                     
                     
                     Division 1A 
                     — 
                     One-off adjustment to cumulative balances for surface water SDL resource units 
                   
                 
                 
                   
                     
                     
                     6.08D Determining  
                     one-off adjustment to cumulative balances from 1 July 2019 
                   
                 
                 
                   (1) The Authority must make a one-off adjustment, in accordance with this Division, to the cumulative balance for each surface water SDL resource unit, unless the register of take for the surface water SDL resource unit had already commenced as at 1 July 2019. 
                 
                 
                   
                     
                     
                     Register of take has already commenced 
                   
                 
                 
                   (2) If the register of take for a surface water SDL resource unit for which the Authority must make a one-off adjustment has already commenced as at the commencement of this section, the Authority must make a one-off adjustment in relation to the surface water SDL resource unit as soon as practicable after the beginning of the first water accounting period after that commencement. 
                 
                 
                   
                     
                     
                     Register of take has not already commenced 
                   
                 
                 
                   (3) If the register of take for a surface water SDL resource unit for which the Authority must make a one-off adjustment has not already commenced as at the commencement of this section, the Authority must make a one-off adjustment in relation to the surface water SDL resource unit as soon as practicable after the end of the water accounting period in which the register of take commences. 
                 
                 
                   
                     
                     
                     6.08E Step 1 
                     — 
                     Calculation of annual permitted take and annual actual take for one-off  
                     adjustment 
                   
                 
                 
                   (1) This section and sections 6.08F and 6.08G set out how to calculate the one-off adjustment to the cumulative balance of a surface water SDL resource unit. 
                 
                 
                   (2) For each relevant water accounting period for the surface water SDL resource unit, sum the maximum quantity of water permitted to be taken by each form of take for consumptive use from the surface water SDL resource unit ( annual permitted take ) in accordance with section 6.08G. 
                 
                 
                   (3) For the same relevant water accounting period, sum the quantity of water actually taken by each form of take for consumptive use from the surface water SDL resource unit ( annual actual take ) in accordance with section 6.08G. 
                 
                 
                   (4) For the purposes of calculating the one-off adjustment to the cumulative balance of a surface water SDL unit, a  relevant water accounting period , for the surface water SDL resource unit, means a water accounting period that begins on or after 1 July 2019, other than the water accounting period in which the register of take for the surface water SDL resource unit commences or any later water accounting period. 
                 
                 
                   
                     
                     
                     6.08F Step 2 
                     — 
                     Calculate and record the one-off adjustment 
                   
                 
                 
                   (1) For each relevant water accounting period, if the annual actual take is greater than the annual permitted take, the difference is a debit. 
                 
                 
                   (2) For each relevant water accounting period, if the annual actual take is less than the annual permitted take, the difference is a credit. 
                 
                 
                   (3) For each relevant water accounting period, if there is no difference between the annual actual take and the annual permitted take, the difference is zero. 
                 
                 
                   (4) As a result of the calculations made under subsections (1) to (3), determine the one-off adjustment to the cumulative balance by summing the total differences between annual permitted take and annual actual take for each relevant water accounting period for the surface water SDL resource unit. 
                 
                 
                   (5) If, in a relevant water accounting period, the circumstances mentioned in the example in paragraph 6.12(4)(b) apply, the one-off adjustment for the surface water SDL resource unit is to be adjusted by including the amount attributable to those circumstances as a credit, and subsection 6.11(5) does not apply to the relevant water accounting period. 
                 
                 
                   (6) The one-off adjustment for the surface water SDL resource unit is to be adjusted to account for any disposal or acquisition of held environmental water for each relevant water accounting period. 
                 
                 
                   (7) Record the one-off adjustment on the register of take as either a debit, a credit or zero. 
                 
                 
                   (8) For the water accounting period in which the one-off adjustment is recorded, the cumulative balance determined under subsection 6.11(4) is to include the effect of the one-off adjustment. 
                 
                 
                   
                     
                     
                     6.08G How to calculate the annual permitted take and the annual actual take 
                   
                 
                 
                   (1) Subject to this section, the annual permitted take and the annual actual take are to be worked out using the method set out in the water resource plan for the surface water SDL resource unit for the purposes of sections 10.10 and 10.15. 
                 
                 
                   Note 1: Section 10.10 requires a water resource plan to set out a method for determining the maximum quantity of water permitted to be taken by each form of take for consumptive use from the surface water SDL resource unit in each water accounting period. 
                 
                 
                   Note 2: Section 10.15 requires a water resource plan to set out how the quantity of water actually taken for consumptive use by each form of take from each SDL resource unit will be determined after the end of a water accounting period using the best information available at the time. 
                 
                 
                   (2) If the annual permitted take or the annual actual take cannot be worked out in accordance with subsection (1) because the data is not available for a form of take, the annual permitted take and the annual actual take are to be: 
                 
                 
                   (a) the long-term annual average take for that form of take; or 
                 
                 
                   (b) worked out in accordance with an alternative method determined by the Authority in consultation with the relevant Basin State before whichever of the following applies: 
                 
                 
                   (i) if the water resource plan for the surface water SDL resource unit is accredited as at the commencement of this section—on or before the first 30 June after that commencement; 
                 
                 
                   (ii) if the water resource plan for the surface water SDL resource unit is not accredited as at the commencement of this section—on or before 30 June of the water accounting period in which the register of take commences. 
                 
                 
                   (3) The Authority must publish the method used on its website. 
                 
                 
                   (6) Schedule 2, item 12, page 15 (line 18), omit "water access entitlement", substitute "water access right, water delivery right or irrigation right". 
                 
                 
                   (7) Schedule 2, page 15 (after line 26), after item 13, insert: 
                 
                 
                   
                     
                     
                     13A Section 7.02 
                   
                 
                 
                   Omit "In", substitute "(1) In". 
                 
                 
                   (8) Schedule 2, item 16, page 16 (line 3), omit "water access entitlement", substitute "water access right, a water delivery right or an irrigation right, or part of such a right,". 
                 
                 
                   (9) Schedule 2, page 16 (after line 15), after item 19, insert: 
                 
                 
                   
                     
                     
                     19A At the end of section 7.02 
                   
                 
                 
                   Add: 
                 
                 
                   (2) A reference in this Chapter and in Schedule 6A to a water access right, a water delivery right, an irrigation right or a water access entitlement includes a reference to a part of such a right or entitlement. 
                 
                 
                   (10) Schedule 2, item 21, page 17 (lines 15 and 16), omit "that a water access entitlement, for a surface water SDL resource unit,", substitute "that a water access right, a water delivery right, or an irrigation right, for a surface water SDL resource unit, or part of such a right,". 
                 
                 
                   (11) Schedule 2, item 21, page 17 (line 20), omit "water access entitlement", substitute "right, or the part of the right,". 
                 
                 
                   (12) Schedule 2, item 21, page 17 (after line 28), at the end of subsection (2), add: 
                 
                 
                   Note: Water access rights, water delivery rights and irrigation rights are types of rights that fall within the definition of  held environmental water  (see subsection 4(1) of the Act). 
                 
                 
                   (13) Schedule 2, item 21, page 17 (line 29), omit "water access entitlement", substitute "right or the part of the right". 
                 
                 
                   (14) Schedule 2, item 21, page 18 (line 5), omit "entitlement", substitute "right, or the part of the right,". 
                 
                 
                   (15) Schedule 2, item 21, page 18 (line 9), omit "an entitlement", substitute "a right, or a part of a right,". 
                 
                 
                   (16) Schedule 2, item 40, page 22 (line 30), omit "entitlements", substitute "rights, water delivery rights or irrigation rights". 
                 
                 
                   (17) Schedule 2, item 40, page 22 (line 32), omit "entitlements", substitute "rights, water delivery rights and irrigation rights". 
                 
                 
                   (18) Schedule 2, item 53, page 26 (line 6), omit "entitlements", substitute "rights, water delivery rights and irrigation rights". 
                 
                 
                   (19) Schedule 2, item 60, page 27 (line 9), omit "entitlements", substitute "rights, water delivery rights or irrigation rights". 
                 
                 
                   (20) Schedule 2, item 74, page 29 (line 18), omit "entitlements", substitute "rights, water delivery rights or irrigation rights". 
                 
                 
                   I thank the Senate for providing leave for these matters to be considered together. 
                 
                 
                   Essentially, under the Water Act and the Basin Plan, 30 water resource plans are to be prepared by basin states and accredited by the minister. Water resource plans underpin the water accounting for the Basin Plan, and they are key to its implementation. They were meant to be in place by 1 July, but New South Wales did not meet this time frame. New South Wales still has 11 water resource plans that are yet to commence. The first of these amendments enables the Murray-Darling Basin Authority to make a one-off adjustment for water resource plans that were accredited after 1 July 2019. I've spoken about this a little in response to questions from Senator Davey, but the adjustment would reflect the sum of combined annual permitted take and annual actual take calculations for each relevant water accounting period from 1 July 2019 to the year that the register commences. We've put this amendment forward to provide equity and fairness. 
                 
                 
                   The second amendment expands the scope of the third independent review of the Water for the Environment Special Account, to ensure that the independent panel considers the effectiveness of socioeconomic payments made outside of the account. We've put forward this amendment because we want the review to recognise all socioeconomic payments that are made towards the delivery of the 450-gigalitre target, irrespective of its source. In the absence of an amendment of this kind, only socioeconomic payments made from within the WESA would be considered by the independent review. This is a response to some of the issues raised in the Senate committee. 
                 
                 
                   Amendment (3) creates a new object in the Water Act, and purpose of the Basin Plan, relating to Indigenous people. I spoke about this earlier in response to a question asked of me by Senator Hanson-Young. 
                 
                 
                   Amendment (4) enables the minister to specify a broader range of water rights as additional held environmental water entitlements. These are rights that are already included in the existing definition of held environmental water. They include water access rights, water delivery rights, irrigation rights and parts of these types of rights. This will provide the minister with a broader range of options to increase the volume of basin water resources available for environmental use in seeking to reach the 450-gigalitre target. I think they are the bulk of the amendments. 
                 
              
            
            
               
                
 

               
              
              
            
          