
 
             
              
 

             
            
              
                 
                   
                     
                       Senator HANSON 
                      ( Queensland — Leader of Pauline Hanson's One Nation ) ( 10:06 ):  You've actually just put a nail in the coffin of a lot of these communities and the farming sector out there, because it's not part of your policy. That's not what this is about. It's about coming up with the answers—working out and solving problems in this nation—to help all Australians. This government has no regard for the farming sector of this nation. Why? Because you don't get the votes in those seats. You're not interested. 
                 
                 
                   There's another thing that I'll tell this government it can do: look at building other water resources—dams. Put things in place so that we will have water security in this nation. You haven't even considered that. You have no vision for the future. You put up policy in this place, time and time again, that you actually amend or change along the way. I asked you: 'Have you consulted with the states?' I don't believe you have, because my understanding is: the states aren't happy with this deal that's been done. As to all these amendments that are going forward, do you know what? I don't believe the states are going to agree. Now that you've put up all these amendments, what a bloody mess this is! This Murray-Darling Basin Plan is an absolute mess. You haven't got it right. 
                 
                 
                   It's another bill you have not got right because you haven't done the consultation. You haven't been out to these communities. You haven't spoken to these people. You haven't spoken to the irrigators, the farmers, that you are driving under, in these communities, right across the whole sector—all because South Australia wants the water to flow out to clear the silt. What a waste of water that is—for the water to just flow out into the ocean. You're not worrying about the communities. You're a hopeless government. 
                 
              
            
          