
 
             
              
 

             
            
              
                 
                   
                     
                       Senator McKENZIE 
                      ( Victoria — Leader of the Nationals in the Senate ) ( 10:30 ):  The water amendment bill ensures that the 450 gigalitres will be removed from the basin. Everything you have said thus far doesn't actually answer the reason why you are going after the 450. That was never part of the Basin Plan. It was a political deal at the time, and I was in the chamber as was Senator Hanson-Young. I think we're the only people in the chamber today who were there at that time. 
                 
                 
                   The protections around that 450 were strong and were made stronger by Labor water ministers, by Liberal water ministers and by Nationals water ministers because, over the last 10 years, we have seen the impact that water recovery has had. The indiscriminate water buybacks Swiss cheese our irrigation communities, which is why, when we came to government, we made sure that we had a more holistic approach rather than the scattergun approach of the former water ministers in the Labor Party, particularly Minister Wong, whose policy impact was not only wasteful spending of taxpayer money but had a devastating impact on basin communities. 
                 
                 
                   This bill actually removes that 450 gigalitre protection, so I want to understand why given you are dismantling the protections within your own act and dismantling the additional protections put in by state based ministers, including Labor based ministers. My home state water minister, who is Labor, does not support legislation before the parliament because it is the southern connected basin in Victoria that has contributed over 50 per cent of the water recovered and it is our communities that are doing more with less—but enough is enough. I want to understand, not the ABARES modelling that you will do in the future or the consultation that you think you might do in the future. 
                 
                 
                   It is a big call for the government to remove those protections, your own protections, and the protections arrived at through state ministers. You are dismantling that framework. So I assume, if you are dismantling that framework, you understand the impacts and won't leave it to ABARES to tell you how devastating it will be and that you will consider it, because, at the end of the day, what you're doing with this legislation is coming for the 450 irrespective of what ABARES will tell you. 
                 
                 
                   If you were really concerned about the social and economic impacts of your policy, you would not dismantle those protections for community industries that your own former water minister Burke wrote into the legislation and that your state Labor water ministers, particularly from Victoria—Lisa Neville—wrote in and agreed to, because they are on the ground and have seen the impact. What modelling have you done on the economic impact to our rural towns and communities as a result of the buyback regime that will be unleashed following the passing of this bill?  
                 
                 
                   Minister, if you can't answer the question of what modelling has been done on the economic impact of your legislation—and, Assistant Minister McAllister, I do appreciate this isn't your legislation, this is legislation that you're representing Tanya Plibersek on. It is clear that she has not done her homework, but that absolutely doesn't surprise me when it comes to this government because, along with Catherine King, Clare O'Neil and a whole raft of ministers in the other chamber, it seems attention to detail when getting legislation before the parliament is not something you really care about. It's actually more about fulfilling ideological positions, which is exactly what this is about. 
                 
                 
                   If the government hasn't done the economic modelling on the removal of the 450 and the dismantling of those socioeconomic protections that you actually wrote into the bill in the first place, can you tell the chamber what will be the risk of these changes on production in the dairy industry in the southern connected basin? 
                 
              
            
          