
 
             
              
 

             
            
              
                 
                   
                     
                       Senator HANSON 
                      ( Queensland — Leader of Pauline Hanson's One Nation ) ( 09:45 ):  We live in a country where we do have droughts and bushfires. It's in our history. That's evident. The fact is the Labor government is insistent on bringing half a million people into this country. This requires more water, more services, more food that we need to provide for them. Our farming is an essential part of this nation and has been ever since it was founded. 
                 
                 
                   The fact is that governments—your government, previous governments—have actually made a hell of a mess of the Murray-Darling Basin Plan. It's been poorly managed and the way that I see it now, and I hear it constantly—I've actually been there, and I've been to the mouth of the Murray-Darling, and I can't get my head around why you're so intent on taking the 450 gigalitres to flow down the river, to flow out to the sea. That is water that's required, and you just want to it to flow out so that you can keep the mouth from being silted up, but you've still got dredging that goes on. So, the mentality is 'let the water flow' so you won't have to dredge. But you're going to have to always dredge because you're actually changing the concept of it by putting barrages in what was classified, really, as salt lakes. They're not the freshwater lakes that people claim they are. They're not freshwater lakes; they were always salt lakes before the barrages went in. So you're destroying communities. 
                 
                 
                   I went to a dairy farmer as well. He has a fantastic operation. He said: 'Pauline, I cannot expand my business because I can't get the water. I cannot even afford the water.' Our dairy industry is shutting down in Australia, and it's the same with growers, irrigators, because they can't get the water. That's why I asked for your priority: is it the farming sector or is it really the environment? I've been down there and, yes, we've gone through drought, but that has recovered, so it's not so much about the environment. Things could be put in place to look after the environment—I'm all for the environment—but this is pure bloody-mindedness, where we're headed with this. And with the number of amendments that have been put through here, especially put up by the Greens and other ones, you are actually destroying the bill. I do not believe the states could possibly agree to what you have before this parliament. 
                 
                 
                   For the life of me I just cannot understand why, Minister, part of this bill you've actually agreed to is that you're going to give—you've got a deal with the Greens to allocate $100 million to help the First Nations people to participate in the water market. Why? 
                 
              
            
          