
 
             
              
 

             
            
              
                 
                   
                     
                       Senator McALLISTER 
                      ( New South Wales — Assistant Minister for Climate Change and Energy ) ( 10:13 ):  Thank you, Senator McKenzie, for your question. You won't be surprised to hear that I don't accept your characterisation of the way that this government thinks about regional and rural communities. Actually, we are interested in supporting healthy, sustainable communities right across the basin, and all through regional and rural towns across the country, actually. Jobs in community is a focus for the government and will continue to be so. 
                 
                 
                   You ask about analysis around the impact of this bill. It is important to understand what this bill does and does not do. It essentially provides more time to deliver the remaining water based on expert advice. When we came to government, the advice to us was that the Basin Plan could not be implemented on the current policy settings, nor could the water infrastructure projects be completed within the necessary time frames. I think you understand—I'm certain Senator Davey understands it—that the consequences of not completing those projects on time are quite significant for rural communities. It is one of the reasons that the bill seeks to establish more time for states and territories to complete the works that they have committed to. 
                 
                 
                   The bill does include the capacity for more options to deliver the remaining water, including water efficiency infrastructure projects and voluntary water purchases. It includes more funding to deliver the remaining water and to support communities where voluntary water purchasing has flow-on impacts, and it includes more accountability, which is a matter that we have already discussed in the chamber this morning. The specific mechanisms by which the government seeks to recover water across the basin are yet to be finalised. This bill creates options, but the detailed implementation arrangements are yet to be finalised. But of course the government intends to consider the economic and social impacts of any policy measures that we implement. 
                 
              
            
          