
 
             
              
 

             
            
              
                 
                   
                     
                       Senator HANSON 
                      ( Queensland — Leader of Pauline Hanson's One Nation ) ( 10:02 ):  Minister, you told me to go to the website, which I have done. I've just received the information here. I asked you who owns the licences. There's no indication of names whatsoever. Actually, the register does not list licences or details of owners; it is just by country. That's what I have here. It has just been given to me. It is foreign held water entitlement by country, as at 30 June 2022. The Australian people might be interested in hearing this, because I'm sure they're not all capable of rushing to the website to try to find it. It says: Canada, 833 gigalitres; United States of America, 711 gigalitres; China, 323 gigalitres; United Kingdom, 315 gigalitres; Singapore, 174 gigalitres; France, 159 gigalitres; Germany, 154 gigalitres; Hong Kong, 134 gigalitres; Switzerland, 116 gigalitres; and Netherlands, 106 gigalitres. The total for the top 10 countries is 3,025 gigalitres. That's foreign interest in our water in Australia. It's not a renewable—well, it is renewable, actually, because it falls out of the sky for the use of the Australian people—yet we have foreign owners actually taking billions of dollars out of this country every year and controlling our water. 
                 
                 
                   Australian people would be absolutely gobsmacked and disgusted to know that there is so much foreign ownership of our water and yet our own farming sector are going under. They are on their knees in times of drought when they're trying to run their businesses. As I said, dairy farmers want to run their businesses here in Australia, but they can't get the water they require to feed our nation and to keep communities that are dependent on this water viable. If the farming sector goes under, the communities will die, because that's where their income comes from. 
                 
                 
                   Minister, why haven't we got a list of names? How do we know that it's not China, the CCP, that owns the water? How do we know who actually does own our water? Why do we have so much foreign ownership of our water? This water is really no-one's to own and make a profit out of. This water should be available to the Australian people and their communities, not be traded. You said earlier that you believe in looking after our farming sector. Then why don't you go back to having water with land, so farmers have an entitlement? If you have farming land and are producing food here, why is there not automatically an allocation of water that goes with that land? Would that be something that this government would look at? 
                 
                 
                   I blame the Howard government for this. When they separated water from land in 2004, that's when the problem started. You can change this. You can allocate some water with land, and, if there's anything above that, then, fine, they can trade that amongst each other and allocate the water. But why don't we get it out of the hands of foreign ownership? Why don't we put it back in the hands of the Australian people? Give it to our irrigators. Give it to our farmers. Give it to these communities. Let them own the water. Don't let it go to foreign ownership. The water falls out of the sky. It doesn't belong to any individual or to whoever pays the highest price for it. Will you consider giving back water with land and water entitlements to our farming sector and these communities? 
                 
              
            
          