
 
             
              
 

             
            
              
                 
                   
                     
                       Senator McALLISTER 
                      ( New South Wales — Assistant Minister for Climate Change and Energy ) ( 19:04 ):  Thank you, Senator Van, for your question. Perhaps before answering it I might indicate that the government has been pleased to work with a range of members of the Senate. Senators bring perspectives from their life experience and their communities to the discussion about the Murray-Darling Basin. It's an important national asset that supports important activities and functions in basin communities and nationally, and we are pleased to receive advice and input from senators who've sought to engage with us in goodwill. In that regard, Senator Van, can I thank you, on behalf of the minister, for your willingness to engage with the government on the matters before us in this debate. 
                 
                 
                   You asked about leasing. I can confirm that the Commonwealth Environmental Water Holder can lease water, and water can be leased as an alternative to purchase. Alternatively, the government might also enter into a leaseback arrangement where the government purchases a water right and then leases the water back for a period of time. Leased water may contribute to Basin Plan targets for the term of the lease period, and I'm advised that the leased water will count only if an entitlement is transferred to the Commonwealth and the water is contracted before the 31 December deadline. Such a leasing arrangement is only available under this bill. Were the bill not to pass, the Australian government would not have this option for the 450 gigalitres of additional environmental water. 
                 
                 
                   Leasing will form one part of the tools that will be available in our toolkit should this bill pass. It will sit alongside on-farm and off-farm efficiency projects, unsolicited water purchases, land and water purchases, rule changes and purchase by way of market tender. The decisions on which tools to utilise will be based on expert advice from the Commonwealth Environmental Water Holder, MDBA and the department and of course will be informed by consultation, including with affected communities. 
                 
                 
                   The minister has consistently indicated she wants all options on the table. She does not seek to express a preference for one method over another or to prioritise one over another. Nonetheless, we are grateful for your interest in ensuring we have the widest possible range of tools, and I can confirm that leasing is one of those tools in relation to the 450 gigalitres, as a consequence of the bill before the Senate. 
                 
              
            
          