
 
             
              
 

             
            
              
                 
                   
                     
                       Senator McALLISTER 
                      ( New South Wales — Assistant Minister for Climate Change and Energy ) ( 19:23 ):  Thank you, Senator Cox, for your contribution. In the interests of time, I will go specifically to your question rather than respond to the many important points that you made. Yes, we have been pleased to speak with you and with the Australian Greens about the ideas that you have about how to best respond to the principles contained in the UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples. We have also engaged with other senators about that, and I understand that Senator Thorpe intends to move an amendment which will require the review of the Water Act to identify how the Water Act can promote the principles of the UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples. We acknowledge this declaration as a standard to be pursued in the spirit of partnership and mutual respect, and we recognise that Senator Thorpe's amendment responds to a number of recommendations relating to First Nations peoples that were made through the Senate committee process. 
                 
                 
                   The review of the Water Act will look at the entire framework of the act. This will be an opportunity to consider how the UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples can be promoted in the Water Act in consultation with First Nations people. It also builds on the government's support for an amendment that, I understand, will be moved by the Australian Greens to ensure that the Basin Plan review will also consider how well the Basin Plan is providing opportunities for First Nations peoples to be heard and how well it is protecting their interests. Can I thank you, again, for your contribution and willingness to engage with the government on this bill. 
                 
                 
                   While I'm on my feet, I do wish to make what I'd describe as a clarification. Senator Van asked me to step through the arrangements that would be in place for leasing. I want to make a clarification, not so much a correction, to be absolutely precise because Senator Davey has asked me about the same thing. I said I confirm the Commonwealth Environmental Water Holder can lease water. By that, I meant water can be leased to the Commonwealth by irrigators as an alternative to purchase. There is obviously an alternative configuration for the Commonwealth Environmental Water Holder where, under different legislative or commercial arrangements, it could run in the other direction. That is not the intention of the bill. I wanted to ensure that the evidence that I provided earlier was understood correctly. 
                 
              
            
          