
 
             
              
 

             
            
              
                 
                   
                     
                       Senator COX 
                      ( Western Australia ) ( 19:16 ):  As Senator Hanson-Young has alluded to over the course of this debate, the Greens have, in fact, secured a number of wins to improve this bill, and some of those specifically relate to First Nations water rights. As the portfolio holder for First Nations, I want to speak to those very briefly. 
                 
                 
                   One of the amendments ensures that, when the Basin Plan is reviewed, the authority must consider matters relevant to First Nations people in relation to the management of the basin, including, but not limited to, improvement to the spiritual, environmental, cultural, social and economic conditions for First Peoples. The authority must also consider how the Basin Plan recognises and protects the interests of First Peoples and how it supports opportunities for First Nations people to participate in determining and developing priorities and strategies for the development, and/or use, of the basin water resources. 
                 
                 
                   Finally, the authority must consider the management of climate risks. A further amendment relates to this and requires that the authority and the secretary provide information annually about First Nations peoples' rights. This will also ensure that we have up-to-date information about how the amendments are playing out on the ground, in terms of the consideration of those matters which are relevant to First Peoples in the review of the Basin Plan. I am amazed that this was not included in the original bill. This amendment fixes what is a gaping hole in this legislation and will ensure that both climate and First Nations knowledge and interests are considered—something that should have been included in the original legislation and the first Murray-Darling Basin Plan when they were introduced way back in 2012. 
                 
                 
                   As I've spoken about many times in this place, First Peoples of this country have taken care of their lands and waters for tens of thousands of years. We hold generations of knowledge that have been passed down from our old people about how to care for country, sustain country and how to read country. We know what signs to look for that will tell us if the country is healthy or not and how we address this. We have that intimate knowledge. For First Nations people, over 40 nations that exist around the basin have this knowledge. They have a deep understanding, and their knowledge can only benefit the river. It is, frankly, ridiculous that for so long their knowledge has not been included in consideration of activities and allocation of resources about the river. If their knowledge had been respected from the start, the basin might be a lot healthier than it is right now, and we wouldn't be scrambling to keep it from dying. I'm glad that there is, finally, a legislative requirement to listen to First Peoples of the Murray-Darling Basin, but, as with many things, I'm disappointed that it took so long. 
                 
                 
                   I want to take this time to acknowledge other traditional owners who are in the building with us today, speaking about another water system that is under threat, and that is the Roper River. These traditional owners put together a 13-metre-long map of the Roper song lines. I sat with these traditional owners today, and I want to thank them for their time and for sharing their stories with me because the importance of their story is connected to what we are talking about here tonight. Roland, Linda, Rosina, Naomi, Clive and Daphne, I acknowledge all of you and your delegation, which has come so far. 
                 
                 
                   The Greens have circulated another amendment that I believe doesn't have government support but, in fact, includes the principles of UNDRIP in the review process, as I've just been informed. I think that's important to note. The amendment specifically seeks to ensure that the UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, which is a relevant international instrument, is considered in the use and management of basin water resources in a way that recognises the traditional cultural knowledge and practices of First Peoples, as well as recognising and promoting their rights to use and manage the basin water resources. It is clear where the government drew the line with respect to that, and I'm glad to hear that it will be considered in the review process. We have a government saying that they are committed to things like the Statement from the Heart and that they listen to our voices, and there will be a lovely report into UNDRIP and recommendations to help implement its principles, and yet we have an opportunity to pass a very specific amendment that acknowledges UNDRIP. We are putting that in front of the government to put their money where their mouth is and actually begin some of that work. This is a very tangible outcome that can be achieved, yet we are told that amendment goes too far and, 'We will consider it.' 
                 
                 
                   But consideration is the first step and I'm really glad to hear that that's what we're doing. We need to make sure that we're not kicking the can down the road but instead embarking on this journey to ensure First Nations water rights are at the centre of the work that we do in the Murray-Darling. I hope that, in the co-design process, this amendment, for the inclusion of the UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, becomes a permanent feature of the plan and the blueprint for everything that we do. We have to not just consider it but implement it and take on board those very important four key principles: respect and protect culture, exercise self-determination, ensure First Nations people are included in decision-making, and ensure that equality and nondiscrimination are applied in relation to our knowledge. 
                 
                 
                   I have a question for the minister. Is there an agreement to consider the principles of UNDRIP in the review of the Murray-Darling Basin Plan? 
                 
              
            
          