
 
             
              
 

             
            
              
                 
                   
                     
                       Mr ALBANESE 
                      ( Grayndler — Prime Minister ) ( 13:12 ):  I join with the fantastic Minister for the Environment and Water in celebrating this day. The 'restoring our rivers' bill is so important, and the passing of this legislation will mean that progress is flowing as well as water. At last year's election we promised to deliver the Murray-Darling Basin Plan in full, and passing this legislation means our government is keeping that promise. It guarantees 450 gigalitres of water for the environment and gives community certainty to plan for the future. 
                 
                 
                   In nine years the former government delivered just two of the 450 gigalitres the basin needs. They said they were on track to complete the plan, but, unfortunately, they were on track to deliver sometime around the year 4000. They promised $40 million in First Nations water entitlement but did not deliver a single drop. They promised $1.33 billion for off-farm efficiency projects but only delivered around $350 million. Where we make promises, we deliver. 
                 
                 
                   The Murray-Darling is Australia's biggest river system, home to more than 2.3 million people that supports 7,300 irrigated agricultural businesses. It produces $22 billion worth of food and fibre every year. Delivering the Basin Plan is vital for the environment but is also an economic necessity for basin communities. The legislation provides more time and more options to deliver the remaining water, including infrastructure projects and voluntary water buybacks; more funding to deliver the remaining water and to support communities where voluntary water buybacks have flow-on impacts; and more accountability for basin governance on delivering the remaining water on time. This legislation builds on the work we've already done to deliver water-saving infrastructure and purchase water from those who want to sell to help meet the plan's targets.  
                 
                 
                   This new law comes at a critical time. After a decade of delay and inaction, the deadlines to the original plan are about to expire. By passing this bill, we're ensuring a healthy and sustainable future for Australia's largest river system. We are building consensus. We're restoring the health of the Murray-Darling Basin. We're getting things done. We're bringing together state governments, local councils, traditional owners and farming communities to map the way forward. 
                 
                 
                   On the other side, Australians can see that relentless negativity always takes you to a dry gully. A dry gully is what those over there are stuck in. From one end of the Murray-Darling Basin to the other, we see proof that those opposite have nothing positive to offer the country. Our government is working for Australia. By saying no to everything, those opposite have left themselves up the creek without a paddle. Our government is getting things done. We're bringing people together. We're delivering for farmers, for producers and for our environment. We are working for Australia. Our approach is working. I commend this bill to the House. 
                 
              
            
          