
 
           
            
 

           
          
            
               
                 
                   
                     The PRESIDENT 
                    ( 09:55 ):  I'll now deal with the amendments circulated by Senator Van. The question is that the amendments on sheet 2266 be agreed to. 
               
               
                 
                   Senator Van's  
                   circulated  
                   amendment 
                   s 
                   — 
                 
               
               
                 (1) Schedule 1, item 9, page 7 (after line 12), after section 86ADA, insert: 
               
               
                 
                   
                   
                   86ADB Consideration of social and economic impact of proposed water purchases relating to the 450 gigalitre target 
                 
               
               
                 (1) Before the Minister approves a program (however described) under which water access rights are proposed to be purchased for the purpose of increasing the volume of the Basin water resources that is available for environmental use by 450 gigalitres, the Minister must consider the social and economic impact of the program on communities in the Murray-Darling Basin. 
               
               
                 (2) Subsection (1) applies even if the program includes water access rights proposed to be purchased with amounts other than amounts debited from the Water for the Environment Special Account. 
               
               
                 Note: Water access rights covers temporary water access rights as well as perpetual or ongoing water access rights. 
               
               
                 (2) Schedule 1, item 21, page 11 (after line 13), after subsection 85AB(1), insert: 
               
               
                 (1A) If, during a financial year, the Minister approved one or more programs (however described) in relation to which the Minister was required to consider the social and economic impact under section 86ADB, the report under subsection (1) for that financial year must include: 
               
               
                 (a) a description of the program or programs concerned; and 
               
               
                 (b) the matters that the Minister took into account in undertaking that consideration. 
               
               
                 Note: The kinds of matters taken into account by the Minister under paragraph (b) could include any social and economic impacts raised in the course of consultation, and any social and economic impacts of transitional support the Government has provided or is providing. 
               
               
                 Question agreed to.  
               
               
                 
                   
                     The PRESIDENT: 
                     I will now deal with amendments circulated by the Australian Greens. Senator Thorpe has circulated amendments to Australian Greens amendment (1) on sheet 2237. The question is that Senator Thorpe's amendments on sheet 2268 to Australian Greens amendment (1) on sheet 2237 revised be agreed to. 
               
               
                 
                   
                   
                   Senator Thorpe's  
                   circulated  
                   amendment 
                   s 
                   — 
                 
               
               
                 (1) Amendment (1), item 14B, subsection 50(4A), after "must", insert "consult and cooperate with Basin Indigenous Peoples and the self-determined bodies of Basin Indigenous Peoples to". 
               
               
                 (2) Amendment (1), item 14B, omit paragraph 50(4A)(c), substitute: 
               
               
                 (c) the views of Basin Indigenous Peoples and relevant Indigenous organisations and entities, including the Murray Lower Darling Rivers Indigenous Nations and the sovereign member Nations of the Murray Lower Darling Rivers Indigenous Nations; 
               
               
                 (d) the management of climate change risks. 
               
               
                 Question negatived. 
               
               
                 
                   
                     The PRESIDENT: 
                     The question now is that the Australian Greens amendments on sheets 2239, 2240, 2237 revised and 2238 revised be agreed to. 
               
            
          
          
             
              
 

             
            
            
          
          
             
              
 

             
            
            
          
        