
 
           
            
 

           
          
            
               
                 
                   
                     Senator McLACHLAN 
                    ( South Australia — Deputy President and Chair of Committees ) ( 09:56 ):  I ask that the Greens amendments on sheet 2240 be put as a separate question. 
               
               
                 
                   
                     The PRESIDENT: 
                     Yes, certainly. We are dealing with the Australian Greens amendments minus the amendment on sheet 2240, so the question is now that the amendments on sheets 2239, 2237 revised and 2238 revised by agreed to. 
               
               
                 
                   
                   
                   Australian Greens' circulated amendments— 
                 
               
               
                 SHEET 2239 
               
               
                 (1) Schedule 2, item 30, page 20 (after line 11), after subsection 7.12(6), insert: 
               
               
                 (6A) A notification may be amended to withdraw the measure under subsection (6) by the person who notified the measure or by the Commonwealth. 
               
               
                 (2) Schedule 2, item 30, page 20 (line 12), omit "and (6)", substitute ", (6) and (6A)". 
               
               
                 _____ 
               
               
                 SHEET 2237 REVISED 
               
               
                 (1) Schedule 1, page 9 (before line 1), before Part 4, insert: 
               
               
                 
                   
                   
                   Part 3B 
                   — 
                   Review of Basin Plan to consider certain matters 
                 
               
               
                 
                   
                   
                   Water Act 2007 
                 
               
               
                 
                   
                   
                   14B After subsection 50(4) 
                 
               
               
                 Insert: 
               
               
                 
                   
                   
                   Reviews to consider certain matters 
                 
               
               
                 (4A) In reviewing the Basin Plan under subsection (1) or (2), the Authority must consider the following matters and report on them in the report prepared under paragraph (5)(a): 
               
               
                 (a) matters relevant to Indigenous people in relation to the management of Basin water resources including, but not limited to, the extent to which Basin water resources could be managed so as to improve the spiritual, environmental, cultural, social and economic conditions of Indigenous people; 
               
               
                 (b) the extent to which the Basin Plan, including requirements relating to water resource plans: 
               
               
                 (i) recognises and protects the interests of Indigenous people; and 
               
               
                 (ii) supports opportunities for Indigenous people to participate in determining and developing priorities and strategies for the development or use of Basin water resources, including opportunities for participation that incorporates free, prior and informed consent; 
               
               
                 (c) the management of climate change risks. 
               
               
                 _____ 
               
               
                 SHEET 2238 REVISED 
               
               
                 (1) Schedule 1, page 11 (after line 24), at the end of the Schedule, add: 
               
               
                 
                   
                   
                   Part 5 
                   — 
                   Reports about activities relating to Indigenous people 
                 
               
               
                 
                   
                   
                   Water Act 2007 
                 
               
               
                 
                   
                   
                   22 At the end of Part 2 
                 
               
               
                 Add: 
               
               
                 
                   
                   
                   Division 6 
                   — 
                   Reports about activities relating to Indigenous people 
                 
               
               
                 
                   
                   
                   85E Authority must prepare annual information on consideration of Indigenous matters 
                 
               
               
                 (1) The Authority must prepare information in relation to each financial year on how, when planning for environmental watering in the Murray-Darling Basin, holders of held environmental water: 
               
               
                 (a) considered Indigenous values and Indigenous uses (as defined in the Basin Plan); and 
               
               
                 (b) involved Indigenous people. 
               
               
                 (2) The Authority must prepare information under subsection (1) in relation to: 
               
               
                 (a) the financial year beginning on 1 July 2023; and 
               
               
                 (b) each subsequent financial year. 
               
               
                 (3) The Authority must give the information to the Secretary in sufficient time for the information to be included in the Secretary's report under section 85F. 
               
               
                 
                   
                   
                   85F Secretary to prepare annual reports about activities relating to Indigenous people 
                 
               
               
                 (1) The Secretary must prepare an annual report that includes: 
               
               
                 (a) the information provided to the Secretary by the Authority under section 85E; and 
               
               
                 (b) information about engagement and other activities undertaken for the purpose of ensuring that the management of Basin water resources takes into account spiritual, cultural, environmental, social and economic matters relevant to Indigenous people; and 
               
               
                 (c) any other matter specified by the Minister in writing. 
               
               
                 (2) In preparing a report under subsection (1), the Secretary: 
               
               
                 (a) must consult the Authority and the Commonwealth Environmental Water Holder; and 
               
               
                 (b) may consult any other person or body the Secretary considers appropriate. 
               
               
                 (3) The Secretary must prepare a report under subsection (1) in relation to: 
               
               
                 (a) the financial year beginning on 1 July 2023; and 
               
               
                 (b) each subsequent financial year. 
               
               
                 (4) The Secretary must provide each report under subsection (1) in relation to a financial year to the Minister no later than 6 months after the end of that financial year. 
               
               
                 (5) The Minister must cause a copy of each report under subsection (1) to be tabled in each House of the Parliament within 15 sitting days of that House after the Minister receives the report. 
               
               
                   
               
            
          
          
             
              
 

             
            
            
          
        