
 
             
              
 

             
            
              
                 
                   
                     
                       Mr FITZGIBBON 
                      ( Hunter ) ( 18:02 ):  I will begin by indicating that the opposition recognises the government's desire to provide certainty to basin communities by placing a cap of 1,500 gigalitres on water purchases. On that basis we will not be standing in the way of this government initiative. 
                 
                 
                   As with the Basin Plan itself and many aspects of it, there are conflicting points of view on the issue of water purchases versus infrastructure measures as the best means of achieving the outcomes of the Basin Plan. Labor has consulted with various stakeholders and with people with divergent points of view on these issues, and we have very carefully considered all of those views. We have also carefully considered the position of the basin states and, again, on that basis we will not be opposing this bill. Again, given the support of the basin states, we will not be standing in the way of this bill in the interests of bipartisanship—which has always, of course, underscored the strength of our progression to the point we have reached today. 
                 
                 
                   The bill proposes to amend the Water Act 2007, to impose a duty on the Commonwealth not to exceed the 1,500 gigalitre limit on surface water purchases in the Murray-Darling Basin at the time of entering into the Water Purchase Agreement contract. Secondly, it amends the Murray-Darling Basin Plan 2012 to provide increased flexibility in the recovery of some 450 gigalitres of water through efficiency measures funded under the Water for the Environment Special Account. 
                 
                 
                   The success of the Basin Plan has always rested on the bipartisan support I referred to. At the federal level, that has been very important, and of course we have strived to—as best we can—extend that to the states. Again, given the support of the basin states we are happy to support this proposition today. As many in this place will know, disagreement over the management of our most important river system and the food bowls which rely upon it actually predates the Federation. In the early years, the importance of the basin to agriculture in South Australia, Victoria and New South Wales led to the construction of numerous dams, weirs and locks. By the late 1960s drought, the overextraction of water for irrigation and rising salinity began to put the health of the Murray-Darling system on the radar of politicians and users alike and—of course—of the community more broadly. 
                 
                 
                   By the drought of the early 2000s—otherwise known as the millennium drought—it had become clear that much more needed to be done and that politicians needed to act. Under the Howard government, the National Water Initiative was agreed and the Water Act 2007 was passed through this parliament. So both sides of this place can take credit for the significant reforms which have taken place in recent years. Now—in part at least, if not entirely—thanks to the good work of the former minister for water, the member for Watson, we have a plan that is restoring our rivers to health, supporting strong regional communities and ensuring sustainable food production. 
                 
                 
                   The Murray-Darling Basin Plan has enjoyed bipartisan support—as I said—at all levels of government and across the political parties. Importantly, it has also had the support of farming, environmental and Indigenous groups. Not everyone has had their way, of course. Restructuring and reform in such an important area as this is always very difficult. I suppose it can be said that the bill before the House tonight is about redressing the issues still held by some of those basin communities in particular. 
                 
                 
                   The Basin Plan brought into force in November 2012 will set basin-wide sustainable diversion limits and return 2,750 gigalitres to the environment. Basin states are required to prepare water resource plans that will give effect to the sustainable diversion limits from July 2019. Under the sustainable diversion limit adjustment mechanism, up to 650 gigalitres can be provided through supply measures and projects that deliver environmental outcomes with less water. Proposals for these supply measures are, I understand, in varying states of preparation and assessment. There is a bipartisan commitment to bridge the gap between what these supply measures can provide and the 2,750 gigalitres to be returned to the environment. On top of the 2,750-gigalitre target, an additional 450 gigalitres will be returned to the environment. Funding was provided through legislation in 2013 for this additional 450 gigalitres, which must be obtained through projects that ensure no social or economic downsides for basin communities, such as on-farm irrigation projects. There is $1.78 billion in the Water for the Environment Special Account, including $200 million for the removal of constraints identified in the constraints management strategy. 
                 
                 
                   To date, more than 1,900 gigalitres has been recovered for the environment. This includes more than 1,160 gigalitres of water through water purchases, over 600 gigalitres through infrastructure investment and over 180 gigalitres through other basin state recovery actions. This is water that can be used at appropriate times and where it is needed to improve flows and help restore health throughout the system. Already, we have seen successful water releases overseen by the Commonwealth Environmental Water Holder and the state and regional water management agencies. Importantly, there has been significant Commonwealth investment in ensuring that farms remain productive as the plan is delivered. Indeed, $2 million a day is being and will be spent on efficiency and infrastructure measures out to 2019. 
                 
                 
                   Progress on these environmental objectives is very significant. The system includes approximately 30,000 wetlands, over 60 species of fish, 124 families of macroinvertebrates, 98 species of waterbirds, four threatened water-dependent ecological communities and hundreds of plant species supported by key floodplains. It is obvious that this is a very important system to Australia. The health of the river channels themselves and the flora and fauna they support is not only vital in its own right but also vital for the economic and social wellbeing of basin communities.  
                 
                 
                   Also related to the environmental needs and environmental flows, the Aboriginal nations and communities in the basin want and should have access to the flows they need to ensure the continuation of their culture and their social and economic wellbeing. Aboriginal people feel a deep connection to their land and the waters that flow through and across them. This needs to be recognised and provided for, not as an exercise in imperial patronage but by ensuring Aboriginal people are empowered through water rights. 
                 
                 
                   I now want to turn to agriculture and its implications, which of course is of paramount interest to me. It is well known in this place that the basin supports around 40 per cent of Australia's agricultural production. According to ABS figures, in 2012-13 the basin accounted for more than 50 per cent of Australia's irrigated produce. There are some fascinating figures here that will surprise some in the House who have not had the opportunity to look at these issues in such detail, and I of course exempt the member for Riverina from that group. Almost 100 per cent of Australia's rice, 96 per cent of Australia's cotton, 75 per cent of Australia's grapes, 59 per cent of Australia's hay, 54 per cent of Australia's fruit, 52 per cent of Australia's production from sheep and livestock and 45 per cent of Australia's dairy come from the basin. Around two million people live and work in the basin, in communities ranging from centres with fewer than 1,000 people to large urban centres, such as Wagga Wagga, in the member for Riverina's electorate. A further 1.2 million people depend on its water to survive. All of this agricultural production and the two million people living in the basin rely on a healthy, functioning river system. 
                 
                 
                   Many people in Australian agriculture do not have the benefits and advantages of a river system or an underground water system. Many of them, well into their third year of drought, are starting to understand the challenges of that more and more. With the growing prediction of another El Nino, we fear relief is not coming any time soon. It is now almost two years since the Prime Minister and his agriculture minister went to Longreach to tour around affected areas of that part of the world and therefore almost two years since the Prime Minister announced his first tranche of assistance for drought affected farmers. Two years on, sadly, the farmers are still wondering what it is all about. 
                 
                 
                   Various attempts at utilising concessional loans have been abject failure. As much as they might like to, few in this place would challenge that proposition. As at April less than half of the money allocated for the Drought Concessional Loans Program has been taken up—much less than half, in fact—and less than three per cent of the drought recovery loans had been allocated. That latter point should not be too surprising to many in the House, because the title indicates that they are drought recovery loans and very, very few people in those parts of the world would consider themselves, or be deemed to be classified, as in recovery mode, unfortunately. 
                 
                 
                   The tragedy of this is that the outcome goes beyond the obvious failure of the policy. In fact, farmers have been misled to believe that the government is providing all this drought assistance money when that is certainly not the case. The government has been claiming that up to $790 million is being provided or put on the books to assist drought affected farmers. But this is a bit of a cruel hoax. It makes the six o'clock news okay, but it has not helped the farmers. Why hasn't it helped the farmers? There are a number of reasons. Farmers either have not been able to qualify for the loans or, because of the nature of things, find that the loans do not extend to them any real benefit. In other words, the differential between the loan rates is often not sufficient to motivate them to go through the pain and the grief of the bank relationship and the paperwork—and of course many of them just do not qualify for the loans, particularly, as I said, those drought recovery loans. 
                 
                 
                   In my view, the misrepresentation got worse recently when the government had the audacity to inflate the value of its agricultural white paper by including in the white paper the total value of every loan that might be lent out—or might not be lent out—over the course of the next 10 years. Have a think about that. It was the total value of the loans. If I loan the member for Corio $100— 
                 
                 
                   
                     
                       Mr McCormack: 
                       You won't get it back! 
                 
                 
                   
                     
                       Mr FITZGIBBON: 
                       I say to the member for Riverina: I am very confident I will get it back. If the member for Corio is borrowing some money off me and the interest rate is two per cent, the cost is the interest rate, not the value of the loan. It is not the $100. The government is including in its white paper the total value of all these loans—hundreds of millions of dollars. That is if they are ever lent out, and, given what I have just said, they are not going to be lent out—and we hope the drought recovery loans are not going to be lent out, because it would mean that our people are going to be in drought for another 10 years. That is what it would indicate. But the government has taken the total value of the loan, rather than the cost of delivering the loan, over a 10-year period, and it ends up with a very big number—very, very clever. 
                 
                 
                   But, to make it worse, the bond rate now is still just over two per cent, so the government is borrowing money at just over two per cent and it is lending money out, depending on which concessional loan scheme we are talking about, at somewhere between three and four per cent. You do not have to be a mathematician to work out that this is a win situation for the government. That is a little bit cute of me, because there are other costs. There are provisions for doubtful loans—obviously the government might not get some of this money back—and there are also administrative costs. But the cost of delivering these loans for government is very, very low. 
                 
                 
                   To further exacerbate the problem, the last tranche of loans has still not been rolled out in some states. Why? Because the Commonwealth are insisting that the states pay for the administrative costs of the loans, at least in part. Have a think about that. Different state governments invest varying amounts of money in their own drought assistance programs. The Commonwealth are coming along and inflating this big figure, saying, 'We've got $720 million we're going to give away to farmers,' basically, but they do not tell us that they are borrowing at two per cent and lending at three per cent. Then they impose the administrative costs of delivering the loans—that is, those which are taken up—onto the state governments.  
                 
                 
                   I struck this same problem in the period I was Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry. We were still then trying to implement the farm financing loans, and I struck the same thing. A number of states had not been signed up. With the stroke of a pen, I said: 'This is ridiculous. Let's just pay the admin costs for the states and get this money out into the pockets of the farmers, where it is needed.' Now people have been suffering three years of drought, but, no, that is not what is happening, particularly in Queensland— 
                 
                 
                   
                     
                       Mr McCormack: 
                       Most of it is man-made drought. 
                 
                 
                   
                     
                       Mr FITZGIBBON: 
                       It is man-made drought? I see. That is an interesting intervention from the member for Riverina. The drought that our farmers are facing in Queensland and New South Wales is all man-made—and yet he is a climate change denier. We will return to that point later on maybe. 
                 
                 
                   But this government had the audacity to say, 'We're handing out more than $700 million,' knowing that they are making money on the loans, that half of the loans are never go to be handed out and that, when they are handed out, the government are going to charge the state governments to hand them out. This is not providing much assistance to drought affected farmers. 
                 
                 
                   Then, in the budget, knowing this, they decided that they probably should do a little bit more. There was one initiative in the budget which I support and I will give the government some credit for, and that was some further improvements to the Farm Management Deposits Scheme, because it does provide farmers with an incentive to put away in the good years for the bad. Pre the budget, the government had another good scheme, which provided a rebate for farmers who might want to invest in a new water infrastructure scheme—it might be to sink a new bore, for example. The problem was that the government put such a small amount of money into it that it was oversubscribed on about day two. Then Minister Joyce robbed some money from, I think, New South Wales to send some more to Queensland and made a complete botch of the whole thing. But on budget night they decided we should do more, so they did a couple of things. They introduced some accelerated depreciation initiatives around, for example, investment in fodder and other infrastructure projects to be depreciated over a much shorter period of time—in some cases fully in the first year. That is a hard policy to criticise, but the obvious springs to mind: first of all, you have got to have the money to invest, and, second, you have got to have a profit to offset the deduction from. If you been in drought for three years, you are not likely to have either. That is the truth of it. And on budget night we learnt that it was not going to come into force until 2017, something Minister Joyce was forced to correct—at our urging. But the fact remains that, without the profit and without the cash to invest in the first place, it is of limited benefit.  
                 
                 
                   Then there was the $35 million project entitled Drought Communities Program, which we were told on budget night was going to allow all these local councils to spend money on shovel-ready projects in drought affected communities. This would stimulate the local economy. People would be buying fencing equipment, fence wire and all these things—maybe water infrastructure projects, maybe just a road in the local shire because the council does not have the money needed to do these projects. But there were a couple of problems with this. First of all, the money was much less than the money the government had cut from the same councils by removing the indexation on the financial assistance grants to local councils. They took a big bucket of money off them and gave them a much smaller bucket back. But here we are, four months on and not a project to be heard of—not a project nominated, let alone a sod turned or indeed a project completed. Four months on and we have heard nothing. This was an initiative to immediately stimulate local economies adversely affected by drought. Immediate stimulation and here we are, four months on and we have not even had a project approved, let alone started. What a farce that was. 
                 
                 
                   That takes me to the national water infrastructure development fund. This was announced not in the budget but rather in the white paper. We were told in the white paper that this was going to be a great program to establish new water infrastructure projects around the country. There seemed to be an emphasis on north, which sounds like a reasonable thing to do. I indicated my support for the water infrastructure rebate. But where is the national water infrastructure development fund? We were told about it all those months ago in the white paper. We have not heard a word about it since. It was highly qualified; it indicated that projects would require the support of state governments and/or the private sector, and we all know how cash strapped state governments are, so we are not holding our breath for that to be forthcoming. But what projects are these? Where is the money coming from? How much is the Commonwealth going to contribute? Who is responsible for this fund? We do not seem even to know who is responsible for these projects. But it has been a long time coming, and we are waiting for the details. 
                 
                 
                   On a related matter, I note that in the northern Australian white paper there was a $500 billion infrastructure fund. Five billion—did I say $5 billion? I meant to say a $5 billion. I hope I did not say $500 billion; I certainly meant to say $5 billion. 
                 
                 
                   
                     
                       Mr McCormack: 
                       You can correct the  Hansard ! 
                 
                 
                   
                     
                       Mr FITZGIBBON: 
                       Minister Joyce has led the way on  Hansard  corrections! I have learned a lot from him—not that I intend to pursue his guidance. 
                 
                 
                   There was a $5 billion infrastructure fund for northern Australia. This would imply, of course, that many of these would be water projects. They could be road projects or others, but the government likes to put dams in brackets after everything just to let people know they are the builders of dams. But the questions are: who is eligible to borrow this money, who is going to borrow this money, what are the projects that this money is going to fund and what will be the interest rate? Given that we are living in a very low interest rate environment, what will be the differential between what, for example, a business can raise elsewhere or indeed debt finance from a bank and what is going to be offered? Here we are, all these months on from the release of the northern Australian white paper and we do not know the answer to these questions. In fact, on many of these matters we do not even seem to know which ministers are responsible. I know it gets shuffled around a bit, because Minister Joyce has a go at a few things, it does not work out all that well and then it gets flicked over to Minister Macfarlane to tidy up et cetera. 
                 
                 
                   There are many out there who are asking these obvious questions. When are some of these announcements going to come to fruition? There might be a simple answer to that. It may be that they might come to fruition just in time to become part of an election campaign but not in time to be spent—just in time to make some announcements during an election campaign but not enough time to be spent prior to the election. In other words, by the time the election comes around, primary producers in this country will have had three years of receiving false hope from this government and lots of talk about a whole range of projects, many contained within a failed white paper which has disappeared without a trace overnight because it was so lacking in substance. But there is one plan here and it is a very obvious plan: 'We'll just string Australia's farming community out a little bit longer. We'll keep promising all these things. In particular we'll keep promising drought affected communities we're there to help them.' But the bad news for the government is that they are starting to work it out. 
                 
                 
                   You cannot continue this facade and this pea-and-thimble trick for a whole three years. Eventually they find you out, and people are finding this government out in the agriculture sector. Expectations were raised and raised very substantially. We heard a lot about farm-gate profit. The only thing this Minister for Agriculture has been able to claim is the final signature on free trade agreements for which the Labor Party has more ownership than this government, and that is the truth of it. The sad news— 
                 
                 
                   
                     
                       Mr McCormack: 
                       How can you stand there and say that? 
                 
                 
                   
                     
                       Mr FITZGIBBON: 
                       I will tell the member for Riverina how I can stand here and say that. The former Labor government spent six years developing these agreements. They do not appear overnight. 
                 
                 
                   
                     Mr Marles interjecting — 
                 
                 
                   
                     
                       Mr FITZGIBBON: 
                       I see the member for Corio nodding. He was the last minister to be working on them. Those opposite know that we were so close to securing those deals. Maybe another month or two might have got the set. Of course, it was not so difficult for those opposite, because they were prepared to sign at any cost. They just wanted to take the trophy. That is what it was all about for them, and that is why, sadly, we are having a debate about the China free trade agreement, a wonderful opportunity for Australian agriculture. There is only one group of people putting any of that at risk: those who sit opposite, who are not prepared to concede that there are deficiencies that can easily be fixed with the stroke of a pen without in any way offending the agreement which has been reached with our friends in China. It is about time they got out of the way and allowed those benefits to flow to Australian agriculture. 
                 
                 
                   I close by accepting the invitation of the member for Riverina and simply ending where I began. That is to say that in our determination to maintain the longstanding, bipartisan approach to the development of the Murray-Darling Basin Plan we will be supporting this bill, and certainly from my perspective we also do so in the interests of those basin communities which have been seeking such change. 
                 
              
            
            
               
                
 

               
              
              
            
            
               
                
 

               
              
              
            
            
               
                
 

               
              
              
            
            
               
                
 

               
              
              
            
            
               
                
 

               
              
              
            
            
               
                
 

               
              
              
            
            
               
                
 

               
              
              
            
            
               
                
 

               
              
              
            
            
               
                
 

               
              
              
            
          