
 
             
              
 

             
            
              
                 
                   
                     
                       Mr JOYCE 
                      ( New England — Minister for Agriculture ) ( 19:00 ):  It is a great pleasure tonight to discuss the Water Amendment Bill 2015 and the implementation of the cap. In opposition, I was shadow minister for water and this was a key objective and a key promise that we made, and something that is vitally important to Australian agriculture not just in the Murray-Darling Basin but across our nation for its agricultural output.  
                 
                 
                   We must note at the start that it is not just the Murray-Darling Basin Plan that has returned water to the river. A lot of people think that the only time water has ever been put back into the system has been under the Murray-Darling Basin Plan, but that is not the case. During the Living Murray, $700 million was put aside and invested to recover 500 gigalitres of water. Water for Rivers, a joint initiative between the New South Wales, Victoria and Commonwealth governments, recovered 282 gigalitres—70 gigalitres for the Murray River and 212 gigalitres for the Snowy River and for environmental flows. There was the Loddon River sales deal and the water recovered as a consequence of the unbundling of prior water rights. The Northern Mallee Pipeline and the Wimmera Mallee Pipeline provided a mixture of regulated and unregulated water savings of 75 gigalitres. 
                 
                 
                   What we had at the start of the Murray-Darling Basin Plan under the previous government was something that got very close to a riot in Australia. It was actually quite startling how out of control it became. They were even tempted to go into partnership with the Australian Greens. They were logical; they wanted about 6,000 gigs put back into the river. This would have brought destitution for any of the farming communities. 
                 
                 
                   
                     
                       Mr McCormack: 
                       And floods. 
                 
                 
                   
                     
                       Mr JOYCE: 
                       Yes, and floods in certain areas. 
                 
                 
                   
                     Dr Leigh interjecting — 
                 
                 
                   
                     
                       Mr JOYCE: 
                       I wouldn't be flippant because this absolutely drove people to the edge, that they would have a government that was so completely out of touch and out of control that this issue had raised it head. At that point in time, it was role of the coalition to make sure that if they had a choice between Sarah Hanson-Young and the coalition that we played our part. So we went into partnership with the Labor Party to try to mitigate the effects that they would otherwise have caused. They were in partnership at that point in time. There was a Labor Green Independent government and that government was discussing at one point taking 6,000 gigs out of the system. It would have been an absolute nightmare. We went to work to make sure that we could bring about a better outcome.  
                 
                 
                   That better outcome is here tonight with a cap on buybacks being limited to 1,500 gigalitres. We want to make sure we change the objective so that we focus on the proper triple bottom line, which is economic, social and environmental. What we had before was environment, daylight, daylight, forget about everybody and then make excuses for the social and economic outcomes. That is not what we wanted. We wanted to make sure we maintained the fabric of the towns—the fabric of the Dirranbandis, the St Georges, the Milduras, the Berrys, the Deniliquins and the Griffiths—because the people in these towns have a right to an economic future. Water is wealth. It is so fundamentally important that we get this right. 
                 
                 
                   Tonight, I listened to the member for Hunter's contribution. I diligently waited for their policy going forward. The Australian people have a right to hear their policies. It is getting to that time in the electoral cycle when we should start hearing what the alternative policies of an aspirant government might be. But we are not getting that. The only thing we get from the Labor Party on agriculture are comments on us, because we are the only ones with policies. 
                 
                 
                   
                     
                       Dr Leigh: 
                       How about the white paper? 
                 
                 
                   
                     
                       Mr JOYCE: 
                       I am glad you bring up the white paper because we have it and I want to go through it. It took us to put a further $500 million towards the National Water Infrastructure Development Fund. The facilitation letter has now been sent to me and Agriculture will be taking that forward and making sure we get the process underway. We have already been in discussion with state governments, including state Labor governments, about the rollout of this program. That is just one part.  
                 
                 
                   We have also started discussions with the Productivity Commission regarding regulations affecting agriculture. We have also made sure there is country-of-origin labelling. It never happened under you guys on the other side, but it is happening under us. We have progressed this. We are going to give people a form of labelling that is diagrammatic, that reflects proportionality, that is compulsory and that is simple. 
                 
                 
                   
                     
                       Dr Leigh: 
                       When? 
                 
                 
                   
                     
                       Mr JOYCE: 
                       The process will be rolling out at the start of next year. It never happened under you on the other side. It is easy for you because nothing ever happens under the Labor Party in agriculture, not a thing except bad news. Although they did do one thing: they shut down the live cattle trade. They managed that. That was a great day in the office, that one! 
                 
                 
                   We are streamlining the regulation of agricultural and veterinary chemicals. That is part of the white paper and that is underway. We are standing behind cooperatives. We have been having the discussions with cooperatives. We had CBH in the office today as we start that process of trying to make sure that that runs out further. We are going through the selection process right now for a commissioner to sit with the ACCC so that farmers get a fairer deal. That is a policy that has happened under us. It never happened under Labor because no policies for agriculture happen under Labor. They do not believe in agriculture. All Labor can ever do is comment on our policies because this is the only side that has policies.  
                 
                 
                   We brought forward opt-in for income tax averaging. We had opt-out and now we have opt-in. Once you got out of income tax averaging, you were unable to get back in. We are putting it back in so that after 10 years you can get back in. We are doing this. 
                 
                 
                   We have already brought forward 100 per cent write-off on fences, 100 per cent write-off on water reticulation, a write-off over three years on fodder. These are the processes that are already happening, that we have already done, that are already there. We have done freight modelling for agriculture expansion to try and attract money into agriculture, to attract money for the construction of major nation-building infrastructure. We are already starting the process of better seasonal forecasting. We are putting $29.9 million towards trying to get multi-peril crop insurance up and running. We could go on. 
                 
                 
                   Those opposite pooh-poohed the drought recovery loans because that is nothing. They only ever comment on our policies because they have got none of their own. They said what have we been doing? At this point in time, the total value of loans that have been allocated is $354.87 million—so I am informed right now—between farm finance, drought concessional and drought recovery. What is also important here is 675 applications have been approved. Do you know how many were approved under them? We had eight approved under the Labor Party-Greens-Independent coalition and 675 under us. That is a vast difference. You have to look to the government as to who actually does something in agriculture. We are actually doing it. 
                 
                 
                   The Labor Party got farm household allowance, which is not a loan but a direct payment to those doing it tough, out to 367 people. Under us, 4,522 customers have received the payment. We can see the difference a government makes. We heard from the shadow minister for agriculture, the member for Hunter, that I had died without a trace. What do you call that? A block of flats? It is on the front page. It is not a bad 'look at me'. It is quite obvious that not only did we work hard but we got the respect back from people because they knew we had gone into bat for them. 
                 
                 
                   We heard from the shadow minister for agriculture. It is like a booby prize for the Labor Party—anything agriculture, they hate it. They always wish they had something else, anything—a trip overseas. It is a bad-luck day when they get the Minister for Agriculture. But for us, it is the centre of government. We love it because it represents our work, our key constituency and the things that we need to do, the things that we are doing right now. 
                 
                 
                   The member for Hunter said that the China free-trade agreement had more to do with them than us. I had a look. It started back in 2005. I was trying to remember who the government was back then and I thought, 'Hang on, it was the coalition that started it and the coalition that delivered on it.' Or we are going to do deliver on it if the Labor Party ever decide to come out and publicly state they will support it like the Premier of South Australia, Jay Weatherill, wants it supported. The Premier of Victoria, Daniel Andrews, wants it supported. The Premier of Queensland Annastacia Palaszczuk wants it publicly supported like the premiers of every state. Other people I have some respect for like Bob Hawke wants it supported. Martin Ferguson wants it supported. Simon Crean wants it supported. Who does not want it supported? The love child of the BLF, the CFMEU, does not want it supported. Who do those opposite listen to? They listen to the love child of the BLF. Norm Gallagher, he is back. He is running Labor Party policy. 
                 
                 
                   I know the shadow minister opposite knows full well it is a very bad look for a prospective government to look at its biggest client in the face and say, 'We are considering whether we want to do business with you.' That is a very peculiar thing for a prospective government to say out there away from the sensationalism of the BLF. You would probably do better to listen to the VFF or the NFF or AgForce. They would be better people to listen to than the BLF, but, anyway, you have made your choice. You have built your cross and now you are happily climbing up on it. 
                 
                 
                   What we are doing is making sure that agriculture is at the centre of government. What we have done is made one of the most major policy deliveries in my time in parliament. What we are waiting for is that at some point in time, when all the angels are aligned, when all the things are right that a Labor Party member will come into this chamber and actually deliver what their policy for the future is going to be, any policy, any idea or maybe a question at question time about policy rather than a grab bag of gotcha moments. Because that is what competency does. 
                 
                 
                   You should be spending your time in opposition—and the way you are going, you may be there for a fair while—developing policy. That is what we did. And then when we came to government, we delivered the white paper and we delivered the policy outcomes. If you cannot deliver any sort of vision, any sort of plan for the future in agriculture then when are you going to deliver your plans? 
                 
                 
                   
                     Mr Stephen Jones interjecting — 
                 
                 
                   
                     
                       Mr JOYCE: 
                       We have heard his agricultural policy is now family violence. That is incredible. We will run that one out there. I will take the interjection. The interjection from the member opposite was that his plan, as close as he could get to agriculture, was an issue about family violence. Family violence is extremely important and it needs proper diligence but it has nothing much to do with agriculture. Until you are able to come in here and talk about agriculture then we are going to call you for what you are. It is a pastime. You are incompetent. You have no hope because, if you do not have the acumen to come up with agricultural policy after two years, I believe you do not have any agricultural policy. 
                 
                 
                   
                     We will continue working as hard as we can on the policies that we have delivered. We will start rolling out the infrastructure, which we are already doing. We have got Chaffey Dam under way. We have got Tasmanian irrigation schemes underway. We are rolling forward now with the 1,500 gigawatt cap on the Murray-Darling Basin. This will put some form of security back into the Murray-Darling Basin, which was absolutely decimated by the previous governments and their interaction with the Greens and the Independents, which left us in a bizarre position. There is only one group of people that the Australian people need to listen to if they want to hear agricultural policy and that is the coalition, because the Labor Party, the Greens and the Independents have offered and do offer nothing.  (Time expired). 
                 
              
            
            
               
                
 

               
              
              
            
            
               
                
 

               
              
              
            
            
               
                
 

               
              
              
            
            
               
                
 

               
              
              
            
            
               
                
 

               
              
              
            
            
               
                
 

               
              
              
            
            
               
                
 

               
              
              
            
            
               
                
 

               
              
              
            
          