
 
             
              
 

             
            
              
                 
                   
                     
                       Senator SIMMS 
                      ( South Australia ) ( 20:54 ):  The Australian Greens are committed to the full implementation of the Murray-Darling Basin Plan. The Basin Plan's current commitment to recover 2,750 gigalitres is the absolute bare minimum required to achieve basin-wide environmental objectives and to keep the river healthy. In fact, the Greens have been advocating for more environmental flows over many years. The Murray-Darling Basin is the lifeblood for the nation's most significant agricultural region. It extends for more than 3,300 kilometres; it accounts for 40 per cent of the nation's agricultural produce; and it contributes about $15 billion to the economy. The jobs of tens of thousands of people living in rural communities are at risk if we do not commit to a sustainable and healthy river system, not just for now but for the generations to come. 
                 
                 
                   We only need to look back over the last few decades to understand the devastating effects that can occur for local communities when we do not look after the environmental health of the Murray-Darling Basin. When making decisions on changes to the water legislation, we must always consider the long-term sustainability of the basin to protect both the environment and the rural communities that rely on it. My home state of South Australia is at the end of the Murray-Darling and has been particularly hard hit, so I do understand firsthand the devastating negative impacts that occur when we do not look after the health of this precious river system. Between 2006 and 2010, a record low amount of water flowed into SA, which put immense pressure on our agricultural and horticultural industries, regional communities and the environment. 
                 
                 
                   The iconic Coorong and Lower Lakes are the end of the line, where the Murray-Darling meets the sea. The area is of international significance, recognised for its ecological diversity, and it is the spiritual home of the Ngarrindjeri people. It is a prime example of why we cannot waver in our commitment to the Murray-Darling Basin Plan and to ensuring that minimum environmental flows are met. 
                 
                 
                   The Greens do have some concerns with the Water Amendment (Review Implementation and Other Measures) Bill 2015 as proposed, and we have circulated a number of amendments to address these concerns. Firstly, we think it is unnecessary to allow the water trade revenue to be used for environmental activities. The term 'environmental activities' is vague in this legislation. It fails to outline how an objective assessment could be made to determine if an environmental activity even improves the ability of the Commonwealth Environmental Water Holder to meet the Environmental Watering Plan. While some safeguards are in place for these changes, they do not directly address this concern. The Greens cannot support such broadly written legislation, which threatens to end up being just another blatant cost-shifting exercise by the government. 
                 
                 
                   The Greens have submitted two amendments to address these concerns. The status quo, where the Commonwealth Environmental Water Holder is restricted to only use trade revenue for the purchase of water for achieving environmental outcomes, is working well so far. We see no reason to change this process, given that it has been working well over the last few years and delivering good outcomes for the basin. 
                 
                 
                   Secondly, it is unacceptable that, if this bill were adopted in its current form, there would be no review of the Basin Plan for 14 years. Let me remind you that we are talking about the biggest river system in the country, a system that is full of unique and precious ecosystems and generates 40 per cent of our agricultural produce. It is irresponsible to allow 14 years to pass without a review, particularly when the current legislation fails to even acknowledge climate change, let alone address the impact that changing weather patterns will have on environmental flows. 
                 
                 
                   Our amendment ensures that the sustainable diversion limits in the Murray-Darling Basin Plan are reviewed in 2017 to determine if they adequately account for the projected impacts of climate change. This is a responsible approach so that, when the sustainable diversion limits commence in 2019, they will be implemented with the potential impacts of climate change taken into account. Climate change is happening. It may be a surprise to you, Mr Acting Deputy President Bernardi, but climate change is happening. The science is settled. It is appalling that the plan covering our largest river system in this country fails to even consider how the impacts of climate change could alter water flows. If we do not act on this, it will significantly increase the risks to the environmental health of the river, which has flow-on impacts to a whole range of sectors, including agriculture and tourism, and, of course, the long-term future of countless rural communities spread right across the basin. 
                 
                 
                   We are also moving some amendments that look at the socioeconomic impacts on Aboriginal populations. I would like to acknowledge that this bill does provide some minor but important amendments that improve the recognition of Aboriginal water rights and the relationship of Aboriginal people to the land. It is encouraging to see that the Basin Community Committee requirements have now increased from requiring one to requiring two Aboriginal people on the committee—that is a good thing. The Greens strongly believe that the Basin Plan should provide greater scope to understand the impacts of the plan on the Aboriginal population. 
                 
                 
                   Unfortunately, Aboriginal people still remain among the most disadvantaged groups within the basin, especially with regards to low levels of land ownership and water resources. This population is growing at a faster rate than the general population and it is important that we understand the impact of socioeconomic outcomes for Aboriginal residents, who are some of the most disadvantaged in the basin. The bill before us adds an assessment of the social and economic impacts of the Basin Plan as a specific requirement for the five-yearly reviews of the plan. Our amendment will allow for the impacts of the Basin Plan on socioeconomic outcomes for the Aboriginal people living in the basin to be assessed explicitly. 
                 
                 
                   We are already seeing positive outcomes from the implementation of this plan: improved freshwater flows have kept the Murray mouth open, preventing millions of tonnes of sea salt from flowing back into the Murray and damaging the Coorong. Greater flows have also replenished the water levels of wetlands across the system, leading to healthier vegetation and increased numbers of waterbirds and fish. 
                 
                 
                   Now is not the time to waver. We must not allow 14 years to pass without a review, especially when the current plan does not take into account the impact that climate change may have on environmental flows. We should not be allowing water trade revenue to be used for environmental activities without adequate oversight and reporting requirements, and we should continue to improve the involvement of Aboriginal people in the implementation and review of the Basin Plan. 
                 
                 
                   The Greens remain committed to strengthening the Murray-Darling Basin Plan, not weakening it, and we will always take action to ensure we have a sustainable and healthy river system for generations to come. I encourage all parties here in this place to support the Greens amendments as a way of improving the bill that has been proposed. Thank you. 
                 
              
            
          