
 
             
              
 

             
            
              
                 
                   
                     
                       Senator LEYONHJELM 
                      ( New South Wales ) ( 12:51 ):  The Register of Foreign Ownership of Agricultural Land Amendment (Water) Bill 2016 requires foreigners who own various water rights to report to the government so that the government can let the rest of us know. What a great idea! But why stop there? Let's require foreigners to report on their ownership of other inputs to agricultural production, like diesel, fertiliser and seed. This could be even more important than reporting on water rights, because foreigners cannot take water rights out of the country—even though I am sure they would dearly love to—but they might be able to take diesel, fertiliser and seed out of the country. This would cut Aussie agriculture off at the knees. And why stop at agriculture? Let's require foreigners to report on any business inputs they own here. They could be accumulating a stockpile of Aussie utes and besser blocks, for all we know! 
                 
                 
                   Why stop at foreigners? There are plenty of other minority groups in Australia who might own Aussie things. Let's require anyone who is not a straight, white Aussie to report to the government on what they own! Sure, it will take up a lot of their time, but it least during that time the rest of us can be sure that they were not up to mischief. After all, idle hands make the devil's work! Sure, they might feel singled out and unwelcome while they fill out their forms under threat of penalty, but isn't that what this is all about? Isn't that exactly the point? 
                 
                 
                   Finally, I advise the Senate that I will be moving an amendment that will require the Productivity Commission to investigate, within three years, the effectiveness of this register. I am confident it will find it is an utter waste of time and money. 
                 
              
            
          