
 
           
            
 

           
          
            
               
                 
                   
                     Senator POLLEY 
                    ( Tasmania ) ( 15:26 ):  I have to respond to some things that both Senator Ruston and the former government senator talked about in this debate when they used the word 'consultation' and said that this government consults. It does not matter whether we talk about the Abbott government or now the Malcolm Turnbull government; they do not know the meaning of the word 'consultation'. 
               
               
                 I would also just like to place on record that I actually wholeheartedly agree with Senator Brandis's comments when it comes to describing the Queensland LNP. Yes, it is on the record that I support him, because they are mediocre. But I think it is important, too, for Senator Brandis to reflect on his comments about his colleagues and have a look in the mirror, because his reputation in this place has been soiled continuously since the election of the Abbott government. 
               
               
                 It does not matter if you reflect back on the time when he was Minister for the Arts. There is no doubt he will go down as the worst arts minister in this country's history. That is pretty hard, actually, because the arts, I would think, would be a very interesting but not overly challenging portfolio responsibility. But he cut $100 million out of the arts budget. He also put his own personal touch on where that money should go. 
               
               
                 But there is more. There is a lot more. According to what I have read in the media and have heard in the chatter around this place—and most of the time it is pretty accurate—there is not anyone in the government who actually wants to stand by Senator Brandis because his reputation goes before him. We all remember the $16,000 bookcase that he had put in his office here in Parliament House—$16,000 for a bookcase! He was not like the rest of us who make do with the fabulous furniture that is provided to us in our suites here in Canberra. We know he has a love of books. That is not a bad thing. In fact, it is quite a good thing. But he was a bit arrogant at the very least when minister at the table in Senate estimates. While other senators were asking questions of the witnesses when he was there at the table representing the government, he would just read. He would float off in his own little world and read. That is the arrogance of this man. 
               
               
                 But we also know that he is very, very good at attacking those people who do not have the same opportunities to defend themselves in this place. We know he is a poor example of an A-G. In fact, I think most of us on this side would say that he is unfit for that office after the way he dealt with the second-leading legal adviser in this country. It was absolutely appalling. We can all reflect on the treatment Ms Triggs has received from Senator Brandis with his responsibilities both in this chamber and at Senate estimates. Then there is also the issue around 18C and his view that everyone in this country has the right to be a bigot. As a mother, I have to say that that really is not the sort of thing I have taught my daughters. 
               
               
                 But we also know that on many occasions he has misled this place in regard to the dealings he had with the issue around the second-highest legal adviser of this country. We know that he has not been forthright with the comments there. As always, he has his own take on everything. 
               
               
                 I would have thought that somebody who would be considered to be less than mediocre would be the last person in this place to attack his own colleagues. But I actually believe and support what he said, because I think it is fairly obvious from the Nationals senators who failed to come into this place and support the Prime Minister and the Australian community by banning the Adler. For people like the senator and myself, who are from Tasmania, this has a very strong personal relationship. After all, we are from the state of Tasmania and we all remember the tragedy at Port Arthur. So, for a Nationals senator and a member of the cabinet—  (Time expired) 
               
               
                 Question agreed to. 
               
            
          
        