
 
             
              
 

             
            
              
                 
                   
                     
                       Senator BIRMINGHAM 
                      ( South Australia — Minister for Education and Training and Manager of Government Business in the Senate ) ( 19:04 ):  Make no mistake: the Australian Senate tonight puts the Murray-Darling Basin Plan in peril— 
                 
                 
                   
                     
                       The ACTING DEPUTY PRESIDENT  
                     
                     ( 
                     Senator Whish-Wilson 
                     ):   Senator McAllister, a point of order? 
                 
                 
                   
                     
                       Senator McAllister: 
                       I understand that a government minister does have precedence, but I will draw attention to the fact we've had Senator Leyonhjelm, Senator Ruston and now Senator Birmingham. The call has not been provided to this side of the chamber for some time now. I had wanted to place on record my concerns as a New South Wales senator. It's been widely observed that this is not just a South Australian issue. There are serious issues in relation to New South Wales that do need to be canvassed. I am disappointed I haven't been allocated time in this debate, which is about to expire. 
                 
                 
                   
                     The ACTING DEPUTY PRESIDENT:   Thank you for your point of order. Unfortunately, I saw Senator Birmingham first. Senator Birmingham, could I ask that you perhaps leave two minutes, out of fairness, for Senator McAllister to make a contribution. 
                 
                 
                   
                     
                       Senator BIRMINGHAM: 
                       Make no mistake: the Australian Senate tonight puts the Murray-Darling Basin Plan in peril. We've heard plenty of claims made, none of them based on science. No specifics—just pure opportunistic politics, coming, sadly, from too many sides. 
                 
                 
                   I, like Senator Wong, have held the water portfolio. I've been there through all the difficult steps of the development of the Murray-Darling Basin Plan. I was there when the Water Act was passed initially, by Malcolm Turnbull, back in 2007. It is rank opportunism that now sees, in the midst of a South Australian election and the Batman by-election, the Labor Party, the Greens and the Nick Xenophon Team play politics with this issue. It puts at risk the basin plan, and, in doing that, it potentially leaves stranded a plan that could have, and should have, secured environmental sustainability throughout the basin and secured the equivalent of 3,200 gigalitres of environmental water support and flows throughout the system. But, instead, it leaves that stranded far, far short. Yes, there are serious allegations of noncompliance in places, and they're being investigated by serious entities: the police, the New South Wales ICAC and others. But, frankly, just because people still commit crimes, we don't throw out the laws. 
                 
                 
                   By destroying and by turning their backs on the commitment that Tony Burke gave as water minister six years ago to deliver a review of the northern basin, the Labor Party are tonight turning their backs on the word they gave by siding with the Greens instead. That's shameful. That puts at risk something that many of us have fought for for over a decade— 
                 
                 
                   
                     The ACTING DEPUTY PRESIDENT:   Senator Collins, a point of order? 
                 
                 
                   
                     Senator Birmingham interjecting — 
                 
                 
                   
                     
                       Senator Jacinta Collins: 
                       Well, you might be, Senator Birmingham. But for you to be speaking in that manner, given— 
                 
                 
                   
                     The ACTING DEPUTY PRESIDENT:   What's your point of order? 
                 
                 
                   
                     
                       Senator Jacinta Collins: 
                       The point of order is organisation of the chamber, and Senator Birmingham— 
                 
                 
                   
                     The ACTING DEPUTY PRESIDENT:   You are running down the clock, Senator Collins. 
                 
                 
                   
                     
                       Senator Jacinta Collins: 
                       I am running down the clock. 
                 
                 
                   
                     The ACTING DEPUTY PRESIDENT:   He was going to give two minutes to your colleague. 
                 
                 
                   
                     
                       Senator Jacinta Collins: 
                       He was going to, but he shouldn't be speaking. We've already had a government minister speak on behalf of the government, and now we have another one attacking the Labor Party in an untimely way. 
                 
                 
                   
                     The ACTING DEPUTY PRESIDENT:   It's not a point of order, Senator Collins. It's not a point of order at all. 
                 
                 
                   
                     
                       Senator BIRMINGHAM: 
                       We remain committed to the plan. We want to work cooperatively with all sides. We invite people to come back to the table and make sure we get this plan delivered, not destroyed. 
                 
                 
                   
                     
                       Senator Jacinta Collins: 
                       That's not encouraging them! 
                 
              
            
            
               
                
 

               
              
              
            
            
               
                
 

               
              
              
            
            
               
                
 

               
              
              
            
            
               
                
 

               
              
              
            
            
               
                
 

               
              
              
            
            
               
                
 

               
              
              
            
            
               
                
 

               
              
              
            
            
               
                
 

               
              
              
            
            
               
                
 

               
              
              
            
            
               
                
 

               
              
              
            
            
               
                
 

               
              
              
            
            
               
                
 

               
              
              
            
            
               
                
 

               
              
              
            
            
               
                
 

               
              
              
            
            
               
                
 

               
              
              
            
          