
 
 

 
 Senator BOB BROWN  (Leader of the Australian Greens) (2:42 PM)


—I want to respond to the criticism from Senator O’Brien. Senator Siewert has brought in some very compelling and important amendments to this legislation. Senator O’Brien ought to have been introducing amendments. The Labor Party has enormous wherewithal that the Greens do not. The pressure cooker situation here is an outcome of the government putting major legislation without time for proper Senate scrutiny and without time for proper Senate consideration—we all understand that. Notwithstanding that, Senator Siewert and her staff have been able to look at the 233 pages of legislation and at the evidence before the committee and its findings and come up with a suite of very important and sensible amendments. Then Senator O’Brien comes in and says, ‘I haven’t had time to look at them,’ although they were circulated and available yesterday and we sat here until 12 o’clock last night. Most senators were waiting on the deliberations of the Northern Territory legislation, and yet he says he has not had time to look at them and so he is going to vote against them all. The Labor shadow minister has a decision to make here. The legislation—

 

 

 
 Senator O’Brien 


—I am not the shadow; Mr Albanese is the shadow.

 


 

 
 Senator BOB BROWN 


—The shadow minister’s shadow has a decision to make here. The legislation was brought in with totally inadequate time for the parliament to deal with it. Senator Siewert has diligently come up with recommendations to make it better. Senator O’Brien says he cannot handle that and he will vote against them, but he has as much responsibility in voting against those amendments and passing up the opportunity as he does in voting with the government for the government legislation. He cannot duck out of it as easily as that. Senator Siewert has done a remarkable job here—quite astounding, considering that she was also handling the Northern Territory legislation for the Greens. She has been up burning the midnight oil. She is smart; she is intelligent; and she knows this topic.

 


 

 
 Senator Ian Macdonald 


—She should be the leader.

 


 

 
 Senator BOB BROWN 


—The senator opposite is suggesting that she should be leading the opposition benches. I would agree with that. But when you come to a parliament here you have to deal with what comes before you. It is no good saying, ‘I can’t deal with that, so I’m going to vote no on everything.’ That is not a responsible way to deal with the pressures that are put upon us by the government in the way it runs its schedule and the fact that we are sitting here on Friday, so I do not accept that. Labor takes all the responsibility and must accept all the responsibility for simply dismissing these amendments and saying that it will vote against them. The legislative outcome by missing some of these amendments will be its responsibility as much as the government’s if it denies the amendments.

 

