
 
             
              
 

             
            
              
                 
                   
                     
                       Senator SIEWERT 
                      ( Western Australia — Australian Greens Whip ) ( 12:57 ):  I rise to speak on the Water Amendment (Indigenous Authority Member) Bill 2019 as well. This bill amends the Water Act 2007 to appoint a First Nations member to the Murray-Darling Basin Authority. The establishment of the Indigenous authority member position will increase the authority's membership from six to seven members. This new position does not preclude other authority members from being appointed who are First Nations people. To be eligible for the position, an individual must be a First Nations person with a high degree of expertise in First Nations matters relevant to the Murray-Darling Basin water resources. 
                 
                 
                   The Greens too are very interested in the way this will be interpreted. Some people may not regard Indigenous people with knowledge as having a high degree of expertise, but it is, in fact, a high degree of expertise because of First Nations peoples' understanding of, for example, cultural flows and relationships with lands and waters. We'll be watching that quite closely. 
                 
                 
                   The Murray-Darling Basin Authority plays an important role in preparing and reviewing plans for the sustainable use of the basin's water resources. By putting in place a First Nations board member, this bill makes a positive step towards recognising the unique knowledge and cultural values of First Nations peoples regarding land and water management in the Murray-Darling Basin. 
                 
                 
                   First Nations peoples have a strong cultural and spiritual connection with land and water, and their rights and obligations as custodians must be respected. First Nations peoples have been shut out of decision-making about land and water management across this country, in fact, for far too long. We need to look no further than the royal commission into the Murray-Darling Basin. The commission heard evidence that cultural flows, which seek to incorporate First Nations values and interests into plans, have been at the bottom of the pile. For decades and decades, First Nations peoples have been advocating for a share in the water market, albeit with limited success. 
                 
                 
                   I would like to recognise the efforts of First Nations communities in advocating for their interests and right to have a say in water management in the Murray-Darling Basin. When I held this portfolio, quite a long time ago, they were very active, way back then, trying to ensure that they also were included in decision-making. We need to recognise the unique rights, obligations and responsibilities First Nations people have to the land, sky and sea. We need to ensure that First Nations people have a genuine seat at the table so that their specific, unique knowledge can be incorporated into the critical decisions that are being made about the future of the Murray-Darling and water. 
                 
                 
                   Today, the Greens are supporting this bill as a step towards First Nations people's regaining some of this control and ownership. The Greens will continue to support reforms to water governance and management that protect the social, cultural and economic rights and interests of First Nations people. I repeat: we will be supporting this bill. 
                 
              
            
          